 Last but not least, imbalances have been widening again as the global economy is recovering. They show, however, a somewhat different configuration as China’s current account surplus is well below pre-crisis peaks due to adverse terms–of–trade movements and less buoyant export performance, and high-saving oil-producing economies see mounting surpluses. A desirable rebalancing mechanism should be growth-enhancing and sufficiently symmetric to avoid putting an excessive burden on deficit countries. Such a rebalancing would require more exchange-rate flexibility, which could also help mitigate inflationary pressures in countries where these are strong, while country-specific structural reforms could help to reduce saving and raise investment in surplus countries, and boost saving in deficit countries. In monetary unions, competition-enhancing reforms of labour and product markets could also facilitate adjustments in external positions. General Assessment of the Macroeconomic Situation The recovery has broadened… The recovery from the deepest recession in decades is becoming more broadly based. Global growth has picked up since the soft patch in the middle of last year and activity is driven increasingly by strengthening private final demand. However, progress remains uneven across economies. In the near term, the adverse supply-side shocks from high commodity prices and the earthquake in Japan and its aftermath are damping activity somewhat and pushing up headline inflation. Such effects should fade from the latter half of this year, provided commodity prices stabilise and inflation expectations do not become unanchored. Financial conditions continue to improve and monetary policy remains accommodative in the OECD economies, though increasingly less so in emerging market economies where spare capacity has been largely absorbed. This should allow the recovery to strengthen, despite increasingly widespread fiscal consolidation. Global output growth is expected to be close to 4¼ per cent this year and 4½ per cent in 2012 ( ). On this basis, labour market conditions would continue to improve slowly, though at 7% by the end of 2012, the OECD unemployment rate would still remain well above the pre-crisis level. Underlying inflation is expected to edge up slowly, as economic slack diminishes, to around 1¾ per cent by end-2012. Outside the OECD area, domestic demand is expected to remain robust, necessitating further policy measures to damp inflationary pressures. … but risks remain elevated… … on the upside… … and on the downside … to pursue fiscal consolidation actively… … normalise policy rates at a pace contingent on the recovery… The monetary authorities must judge how to react to higher headline inflation and risks to the anchoring of expectations at a time when sizable, but increasingly uncertain, slack remains in most OECD economies, underlying inflation remains low and fiscal consolidation is underway, albeit at a sometimes uncertain pace. Overall, these factors imply that policy rates should remain accommodative through the projection period. However, the need to keep close-to-zero policy rates for risk management reasons has now faded and an early upward adjustment in policy rates to establish a visibly positive level, as in the euro area, is merited in the United States and the United Kingdom, but not yet in Japan. This would also help to guard against a renewed build-up of financial fragilities and provide a better starting point in event of a need to react to upside inflation surprises. After a pause, and provided the initial rises do not have adverse effects on the recovery, policy rates should be raised steadily in the United States, the euro area and the United Kingdom in the course of 2012, reflecting the gradual, though incomplete, erosion of economic slack and the edging up of underlying inflation. In larger non-OECD economies, and several smaller OECD economies, monetary conditions should be tightened further to contain inflation. It also remains important, both in OECD and non-OECD countries, that exchange rate adjustments consistent with domestic needs and necessary international rebalancing be allowed to occur. … and maintain momentum towards financial reforms Pre-recession peak = 100 at time t OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Global trade growth has rebounded… ). Japanese export volumes are projected to decline by over 11% at an annualised rate in the second quarter, before bouncing back in the third quarter. Global trade is expected to generally remain buoyant through the latter half of 2011 and rise by around 8½ per cent in 2012, with trade growth close to the average pre-crisis (2004-2008) rate of 1.7 times world output growth (  below). The earthquake and accompanying tsunami which hit Japan on 11 March 2011 left approximately 15 000 people dead and 9900 people missing (as of 9 May 2011). According to the Japanese government’s preliminary estimate (Cabinet Office, 2011), the earthquake and tsunami caused some 16-25 trillion yen (3.3% to 5.2% of GDP) of damage to the capital stock in seven prefectures. The impact was focused mainly on three prefectures – Iwate, Miyagi and Fukushima – which account for about 4% of nationwide economic output and 4.5% of Japan’s population, with the impact concentrated along the Pacific coast in these prefectures. The figures include damage to buildings (housing and fixed capital of private firms), public utilities (electricity, gas and water), public infrastructure (such as railroads, ports and highways) and public parks. The experience of past disasters in Japan and other developed countries suggests that any negative short-term impact on economic growth (relative to trend) is likely to be soon followed by a rebound as reconstruction spending picks up (see Cavallo and Noy, 2010). The sizable damage to the capital stock and near-term disruption of supply chains have already resulted in a sizable decline in output. Industrial production plummeted by over 15% in March, the sharpest drop on record. GDP declined at an annualised rate of 3.7% in the first quarter, pushing Japan into recession, and a further decline is likely in the second quarter of 2011. Thereafter, activity should rebound promptly, and grow at above-trend rates in the latter half of 2011, boosted by government reconstruction spending as well as business and residential investment, as was the case in the aftermath of the 1995 Kobe earthquake (see OECD, 2011b for the details). The uncertainty surrounding any projection is particularly acute in these circumstances, not least because the reduced capacity of electricity generation and the disruption to supply chains creates uncertainty about the depth and length of the decline in output. Indeed, the earthquake and tsunami damaged a number of thermal as well as nuclear power plants, which supply around 30% of Japan’s electricity. And estimates by the MIT Billion Prices Project suggest that the range of consumer products available on line has declined by approximately by 15% since the natural disasters. The adverse effects have also begun to be reflected in other hard data, which also show large negative impacts in March. Exports fell by 2.3% (and by 9.7% for the period after the natural disaster) while imports increased by 11.9% (9.5% after the natural disaster) in March (year-on-year). Retail sales in March plunged by 8.5% (year–on-year), likely reflecting a sizeable negative impact on discretionary spending from supply constraints as well as weaker consumer sentiment and voluntary self-restraint ( The Japanese economy accounts for 8.7% of world GDP (using nominal exchange rates), thus the estimated net impact of the natural disaster and associated effects, including reconstruction, should not have a large negative direct impact on global output. Even if a large decline in imports to Japan were to occur, arising, for example, from a decline in domestic demand, it would have only a small direct effect on overall economic activity for most countries. For example, in the United States and the euro area, exports to Japan account for less than 0.5% of GDP (see figure below). The impact would be modest even in neighbouring Asian economies where bilateral trade with Japan is relatively more important, as for instance exports to Japan account for 2% of GDP in China. However, indirect effects could be more severe in the near-term. Although the direct impacts are likely to be limited, the near-term loss of Japanese exports has marked effects on industrial activity elsewhere, through highly integrated cross-border supply chains and a reliance on just-in-time inventory management. One illustration is provided by the number of car manufacturers     in     North     America     and     Europe     who     have     stopped     or      reduced      production      temporarily because of a shortage of key components sourced from Japan. Japanese manufacturing is an important contributor to a number of industries elsewhere; for example, more than 10% of the total supply of some electronic products in the United States is imported from Japan (Japan Research Institute, 2011). Prices have already risen for some electrical components (for instance, flash memory chips), as a result of the production disruption in Japan, especially in cases where alternative suppliers cannot be found. Japan’s share in trade In 2009, percentage of GDP It is difficult to assess the extent to which certain Japanese products play a key role in cross-border vertical linkages. Japan’s outward FDI and export data suggest that these matter mainly for Asian economies. In China, 13% of total imports are from Japan (or 2.6% of GDP). In the United States and the euro area, the share is much lower (6.1% and 3.4% of total imports, or 0.7% and 0.5% of GDP, respectively). According to a recent survey by the Japan External Trade Organisation (JETRO, 2010), Japanese affiliates in Asia and Pacific regions rely relatively heavily on procurement from Japan. In manufacturing, the procurement of raw materials and parts from Japan accounts for a third of total procurement. Local procurement represents just under a half of total procurement. Procurement from Japan tends to be particularly high amongst firms in the electric machinery and precision instrument industries. In the United States, by contrast, Japanese affiliates tend to rely more on local procurement. At least one-half, and in many cases 80% to 100%, of procurement is sourced locally for around two-thirds of Japanese affiliates (JETRO, 2008). Hence the production disruption and its related consequences from events in Japan would be more severe for Japanese affiliates in neighbouring countries in Asia. In comparison: the damage from the Great Hanshin-Awaji (Kobe) Earthquake in 1995 – the most costly disaster in Japan’s post-war history prior to the Great East Japan Earthquake – and from the Great Kanto Earthquake in 1923 amounted to 2% and 29% of GDP respectively (Shirakawa, 2011). Index 2005=100 The solid line represents the main projection for world trade. For details on the methodology used for bridge equation and dynamic factor models, see Guichard and Rusticelli (2011). OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; and OECD calculations. … and domestic demand in the non-OECD economies remains solid Many emerging market economies have continued to experience strong output growth in recent quarters, and capacity constraints have started to become increasingly apparent, with commodity prices and underlying inflation both rising. The expansion has been fuelled in part by strong domestic credit growth and robust private final demand, which has helped to boost the export markets of OECD economies, but also created new policy challenges for non-OECD economies. Past moves to tighten monetary policies and, in some countries, embark on fiscal consolidation, together with the drag on real incomes from higher commodity prices, are however starting to moderate activity. In China, GDP growth softened to an annualised rate of 8¾ per cent in the first quarter, with retail sales still rising strongly but investment slackening. Ongoing monetary policy tightening and higher inflation have begun to damp income and credit growth, and recent PMI surveys point to some near-term softening in activity. In contrast, PMI surveys have yet to weaken noticeably in India, although private investment is now moderating after strong growth through much of last year. In Brazil, where the output gap closed rapidly in the aftermath of the recession, fiscal consolidation has begun and output growth has started to slow, with strong investment growth being offset by a continued drag on growth from net trade, in part due to the marked appreciation of the exchange rate fuelled by strong capital inflows. In contrast, growth has begun to pick up in Russia and South Africa, with higher international commodity prices helping to stimulate activity. Overall financial conditions have continued to improve in the major OECD economies… A unit increase (decline) in the index implies an easing (tightening) in financial conditions sufficient to produce an average increase (reduction) in the level of GDP of ½ to 1% after four to six quarters. See details in Guichard et al. Datastream; OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; and OECD calculations. … supported by corporate debt and equity markets… loans which offer less protection to the lending party than traditional covenants, than in 2006, the last year prior to the onset of the crisis. Last observation: April 2011 Adjusted P/E ratios are calculated as the ratio of stock prices to the moving average of the previous 10 years’ earnings, adjusted for nominal trend growth. Averages shown exclude the period 1998-2000 to remove the asset bubble effects. … in spite of higher long-term government yields Business investment has rebounded… A simple indicator-type model for business investment in the United States, in which investment growth is related to current and past lags of survey measures of investment intentions and the OECD US financial conditions index, points to solid growth in investment volumes of just over 9% this year, compared with a projected rise of 8¼ per cent. For the euro area, where information on investment intentions is less timely and published less frequently, an indicator-type model using survey measures of production expectations and the euro area financial conditions index is found to track business investment reasonably well. This model points to investment growth of just over 6½ per cent in the euro area in 2011, a little stronger than the projected rise of 5¼ per cent. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. … but the recovery in commercial property markets is more hesitant The recovery in housing markets remains mixed… ). Notwithstanding recent increases in investment, the ratio of housing investment to GDP remains below both the average level seen in past troughs and the average level over the past 3 decades in the OECD as a whole and the aggregate euro area. Canada and Finland are notable exceptions, in part reflecting their relatively high price elasticity of housing supply (OECD, 2011a). House price-to-income and price-to-rent ratios are close to their long-term averages in the OECD as a whole ( House prices deflated by the private consumption deflator. Calculation based on 20 countries (18 available in 2010q4). OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; and various national sources, see Table A.1 in Girouard et al. … but investment is expected to edge up Going forward, OECD-wide housing investment is expected to rise gently relative to GDP from the latter half of 2011, but more rapidly in Japan and New Zealand, with reconstruction expenditure generating strong investment growth in these economies from mid-2011 onwards. Nonetheless, given the now-small share of housing investment in OECD GDP, the contribution from the projected recovery in investment will provide only a modest boost to OECD output growth. Inventory levels are close to longer-term norms… High-frequency indicators suggest that inventories are now close to normal levels in most major OECD economies, although supply-chain disruptions in the aftermath of the earthquake in Japan are likely to result in some temporary depletion of stocks. The contribution of inventories to quarterly output growth is assumed to be zero from the third quarter of 2011 onwards in the projections. … and household saving rates have begun to edge down Household saving rates have recently begun to edge down in many OECD countries, though they still remain elevated relative to pre-crisis norms. Asset price increases, higher saving and associated debt deleveraging have all helped to repair household balance sheets since the recovery began, softening the need for any additional increases in saving rates for balance-sheet purposes. Improving labour market outcomes and credit conditions may also continue to diminish the need for precautionary saving. Wealth-to-income ratios are now above 5-10 year pre-crisis averages in the United Kingdom, and, in the euro area, are close to the peak level since the formation of the euro area. This suggests that the saving ratio might soften further in these economies, provided credit conditions do not deteriorate. In the United States, additional balance sheet adjustment is likely to be required, reflecting ongoing housing market weakness and the consequent implications for household net worth. But with debt on a clearly declining trajectory, a higher saving rate will not be required to ensure adjustment. Indeed, with the rate of job creation gathering pace, the US saving ratio is projected to edge down by around ¾ of a percentage point from the current level of 5¾ per cent over the projection period. In Japan, the uncertainty created by the earthquake and its aftermath may increase household precautionary saving for a while, although this could be offset, at least in part, by the need to finance replacement of lost goods and property. et al. (2010), provides a further indication of the potential for strong growth in consumer demand at present, with sales in the euro area, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States still remaining below longer-term trends ( and trend car sales 1995 – 2012, number of cars in millions Seasonally adjusted. For 2011 based on annualised sales in first four months for the United States, China, Germany, France, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom and in first three months for Japan. Euro 4 includes Germany, France, Italy and Spain. et al. Global commodity prices have surged… In the near term, strong commodity price growth is reducing real income growth, and thus damping consumer expenditure somewhat. Brent crude oil prices have increased by around 50% since mid 2010 ( ), and volatility has been high. Up to the end of 2010, most of the increase in the oil price seemed to relate to strong oil demand outside the OECD area ( ). More recently, political unrest in the MENA region has caused prices to surge further, reflecting concerns that supply disruptions might spread. Increased oil and gas imports by Japan in the aftermath of the natural disaster may also be adding to upward pressures on prices. Prices for non-oil commodities have also increased steeply, surpassing their record levels of 2008 for many items. The rise in oil prices and adverse weather conditions in different regions of the world are the main drivers of rising international food prices. Empirical research indicates that strong world oil demand was a major factor behind the run-up in crude oil prices to record levels in summer 2008, driven by buoyant demand from emerging market economies, notably China and the Middle East (see figure below). The recent episode of rising oil prices since 2009 also coincides with a strong upswing in oil demand outside the OECD area. Supply side factors also play a role. Crude oil supply levelled off in the middle of the last decade. Long time lags between investment decisions and new oil production coming on stream, declining oil production from many conventional oil fields outside OPEC and shortages of qualified labour all contributed to this development. Climatic and geopolitical factors, production cuts by OPEC and low levels of spare capacity as well as constraints in the refining system have at times also restrained supply. However, higher prices have been accompanied by renewed growth in OPEC production capacity in 2009 and 2010. In the current episode of rising oil prices, political unrest in North Africa and the Middle East caused prices to surge further, both reflecting direct supply disruptions and concerns that they might spread. Other macroeconomic factors, such as movements in exchange rates and interest rates, also play a role. Low real interest rates are likely to have contributed to the upward pressure on oil prices. Lower interest rates make it less profitable for producers to extract oil and invest the proceeds on the financial market, which might reduce the supply of oil, putting upward pressure on the spot price. At the same time, the opportunity costs of holding stocks of oil decline, which can put upward pressure on oil demand. Indeed, estimates from a simple structural vector auto-regression model suggest that a reduction in the US 3‑month real interest rate by one percentage point could push up oil prices by about $4 cumulatively by the end of the second year after the shock occurred. Buoyant income growth in emerging markets, coupled with deepening world trade integration, was also an important driver for the upswing in non-oil commodity prices. With respect to food, rising underlying demand growth for meat in emerging markets is part of this effect. Adverse supply side factors also played a role. In particular, rising oil prices contributed substantially to rising prices for non-oil commodities, food in particular, whose production is generally energy intensive. For food, this link was reinforced by bio-fuel policies. Between 2000 and 2009, global output of bio-ethanol quadrupled and production of biodiesel increased   tenfold,   with   government   support   policies   having    been    a    major    driver    behind    the    up swing. Increases in the price of oil enhance ethanol’s competitiveness relative to petrol and strengthen its demand. With both bio-energy and food utilising the same inputs and the supply elasticity of crops limited in the short run, increases in the production of ethanol reduce the supply of crops for food and raise food prices. Supply disruptions due to extreme weather conditions added to upward pressure on prices, as did export restrictions in some traditional large commodity-export countries. i.e.  current purchases for future selling) held by non-commercial oil traders have markedly increased on average over recent years as oil prices were trending upwards (see second figure). However, recent commodity price increases have been broad-based, including in particular certain food commodities for which organised futures markets do not exist. This suggests that factors other than financial market speculation are the main drivers for a number of commodity prices, although oil prices could be a channel through which financial factors influence other commodities as well. Also, information concerning future oil prices is conflicting. On the one hand, record levels of net long positions by non-commercial traders appear to indicate expectations of further rising oil prices. On the other hand, with the futures curve flat until end-2011 and bending downwards thereafter, lower oil prices are expected in the future – though caveats apply to the information content of oil futures. US Commodity Futures Trading Commission and Datastream. et al. et al. The result, evaluated at the sample mean real oil price over 1986-2010, is derived from a structural vector-autoregression, estimated with quarterly data over the period 1986 to 2010 and involving, besides the real price for Brent oil, a measure of real world GDP, US real short-term interest rates and the US real effective exchange rate. The order of variables follows Akram (2009). … which will damp the near-term recovery Food items make up a large share of consumption baskets in lower-income countries but are also significant in OECD economies. For example, the share of food items in domestic private consumption is around 14% in the United States and 19% in Japan. The raw material part of private consumption baskets is much lower though, due to trade margins and various non-commodity inputs into food production. Back-of-the-envelope calculations with these factors taken into consideration, and under the assumption of unchanged exchange rates and nominal incomes, suggest that a sustained increase in food and oil commodity prices of the size seen over the past six months would mechanically reduce, all else being equal, households’ real disposable incomes by almost 1½ per cent in the major OECD areas. Economy-wide income effects would be smaller though, with domestic food producers benefitting from price increases and consumption patterns adjusting in favour of goods with smaller relative price increases. Empirical estimates suggest that the short-term impact of a $10 increase in crude oil prices could be two-tenths of a percentage point lower GDP growth in the OECD area over the first two years ( Growth is set to gather pace gradually… … in the United States… Growth in the United States is expected to pick up modestly from the second quarter of 2011, supported by accommodative monetary policy and favourable financial conditions, and the gradual fading of the adverse effects from high commodity prices and remaining weaknesses in labour and property markets and household balance sheets. Nonetheless, the momentum of the recovery is likely to remain muted, with a modest drag on activity from fiscal consolidation in 2012. Low interest rates, strong corporate profits and normal cyclical forces should support robust growth in equipment investment, but excess supply in property markets will continue to weigh on housing and commercial property investment for some time. Private consumption growth should be helped by further improvements in labour market conditions, but ongoing balance-sheet adjustment is likely to constrain the extent to which the household saving rate can fall. With a continuation of the recent pick-up in employment growth, the unemployment rate is projected to decline to around 7½ per cent by the end of 2012, still well above the pre-crisis level. Effects of an oil price increase on GDP and inflation – Survey of recent estimates OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Fiscal policy settings for 2011 are based as closely as possible on legislated tax and spending provisions. Where policy changes have been announced but not legislated, they are incorporated if it is deemed clear that they will be implemented in a shape close to that announced. Where government plans are available for 2012, fiscal projections follow the plans. Otherwise, in countries with impaired public finances, a tightening of the underlying primary balance of 1% of GDP in 2012 has been built into the projections. Where there is insufficient information to determine the allocation of budget cuts, the presumption is that they apply equally to the spending and revenue side, and are spread proportionally across components. These conventions allow for needed consolidation in countries where plans have not been announced at a sufficiently detailed level to be incorporated in the projections. Along this line, the following assumptions were adopted (with additional adjustments if OECD and government projections for economic activity differ): For the United States, the assumptions for 2011 are based on legislated measures. Given the legislative uncertainty about budget policy for 2012, the general government underlying primary deficit is assumed to decline by 1% of GDP from the level in 2011. For Japan, the projections are based on the Fiscal Management Strategy announced in June 2010, which limits the issuance of new government bonds in FY 2011-12 to the FY 2010 level. This constraint is broadly respected through a combination of spending and revenue measures, notwithstanding the need for earthquake-related reconstruction spending. For Germany, the government’s medium-term consolidation programme, announced in September 2010, as well as the phasing out of the temporary components of the fiscal stimulus packages have been built into the projections. For France, the projections incorporate the government’s medium-term consolidation programme. For Italy, the projections incorporate the measures announced in the 2011 budget legislation and confirmed in the revised Stability Programme. For the United Kingdom, the projections are based on tax measures and spending paths set in the March 2011 budget. is based on national accounting conventions. These require that liabilities are recorded at market prices as opposed to constant   nominal   prices  (as  is  the  case,  in  particular,  for  the  Maastricht  definition  of  general  government debt). In 2010, euro area countries with unsustainable fiscal positions that have asked for assistance from the European Union and the IMF (Greece, Ireland and Portugal) experienced large declines in the price of government bonds. For the purpose of making the analysis in the independent from strong temporary fluctuations in government debt levels on account of revaluations, the change in 2010 in government debt in these countries has been approximated by the change in government liabilities recorded for the Maastricht definition of general government debt. In the United States, the programme of quantitative easing is assumed to be completed in June as announced. The target Federal Funds rate is assumed to be raised in a series of small steps by 100 basis points in the remainder of this year to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored. After a pause in the first half of 2012, the rate is assumed to rise steadily to 2¼ per cent at the end of the year as the recovery progresses. In the euro area, after having raised the refinancing rate in April 2011, the European Central Bank is assumed to keep the rate constant for the remainder of this year. A gradual normalisation of the main policy rate would be warranted from early 2012, with an erosion of economic slack and edging up of underlying inflation. Thus, the main refinancing rate is assumed to increase through 2012 to 2¼ per cent by the end of 2012. In Japan, the current interest rate policy needs to be continued until inflation is firmly positive. The short-term policy interest rate is assumed to remain at 10 basis points for the entire projection horizon. In the United Kingdom, the policy interest rate is assumed to increase by 50 basis by the end of the current year to prevent continued increases in inflation expectations. After a pause, to assess the effects on the recovery, the policy rate is assumed to increase further by an additional 125 basis points in 2012 as the recovery firms. For the United States, Japan, Germany and other countries outside the euro area, 10-year government bond yields are assumed to converge towards a reference rate, determined as future projected short rates plus a term premium and an additional premium for countries with government gross debt exceeding 75% of GDP, equal to 4 basis points for each percentage point of the debt ratio above 75%. The assumptions regarding long-term sovereign debt spreads in the euro area For Greece, Portugal and Ireland, spreads are assumed to remain constant until end 2011 at the average observed in April, before halving through 2012 as progress in consolidation and economic adjustment leads to a spontaneous increase in confidence or perceptions increase that additional official financing would be forthcoming, if needed. For Spain, spreads are assumed to remain constant until end 2011 at the average value observed in April, before falling by a quarter through 2012. For other euro area countries, spreads are assumed to remain constant until end 2012 at the average value observed in April. The projections assume unchanged exchange rates from those prevailing on 6 May 2011: $1 equals 80.31 JPY, 0.70 EUR (or equivalently, 1 EUR equals $1.43) and CNY 6.49. The price of a barrel of Brent crude oil is assumed to be constant at $120 from the second quarter of this year onwards. Non-oil commodity prices are assumed to be constant at the average level in March and April 2011 over the projection period. The cut-off date for information used in the projections is 19 May 2011. Details of assumptions for individual countries are provided in … Japan… In Japan, the immediate aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake has seen sizable declines in production and consumption, as well as business and consumer confidence. Given the experience of past disasters in Japan and elsewhere, the large negative impact on GDP in the first and second quarters is expected to be reversed quickly as reconstruction efforts get underway. Strong growth in both public and private investment is projected in the latter half of the year and the early months of 2012 to replace housing and fixed capital assets destroyed in the disaster, and export growth should bounce back as supply chains are restored. Private consumption is also projected to pick up from the latter half of this year. However, after a temporary sharp decline in the second quarter, import volume growth is likely to be higher than otherwise, given the need for higher oil imports to replace nuclear power. Over the year to the fourth quarter of 2011 output is projected to be broadly constant, but calendar year growth is likely to be negative this year. By the latter half of 2012, as the level of reconstruction spending falls, growth is expected to soften, with public consumption and fixed investment both contracting as consolidation efforts strengthen. The unemployment rate is expected to decline only gently over the projection period to 4½ per cent, thus remaining above its pre-crisis level. … the aggregate euro area… Within the euro area, economic prospects remain uneven, reflecting the ongoing and necessary rebalancing between the core economies and some of those at the periphery. This adjustment is particularly forceful in countries that have asked for assistance from the European Union and the IMF and are facing intense financial market scrutiny. In these economies, sizable fiscal consolidation is being implemented, area-wide monetary policy is tighter than appropriate on purely domestic grounds, and private sector demand is constrained by still-weak balance sheets and adverse labour market conditions. However, some signs of rebalancing are appearing, with external competitiveness now improving in Ireland and Greece, on the back of falling unit labour costs, which should boost export growth over the projection period. Domestic demand is projected to weaken in Portugal, Greece and Ireland in both 2011 and 2012, but strong export growth could result in modest GDP growth by 2012, except in Portugal. The necessary budget consolidation in these countries is proceeding. In Greece, budget consolidation in 2010 amounted to around 7½ per cent of GDP, a little less than targeted. On the OECD projection, this effort is set to be followed by additional reductions in the underlying deficit of around 4¼ per cent of GDP in 2011 and 1% in 2012, in line with EU/IMF programme targets. In Ireland, the budget deficit ballooned in 2010 due to bank rescue costs, but the underlying deficit is now projected to be cut by 3½ per cent of potential GDP (5% in terms of the underlying primary balance) from 2010 to 2012, in line with the agreement with the European Union and the IMF. In Portugal, strong consolidation is underway this year and further measures will be introduced in the context of the EU/IMF financial assistance programme; the underlying fiscal deficit is projected to decline by 4¼ and 2¼ per cent of potential GDP in 2011 and 2012, respectively. However, notwithstanding these consolidation efforts, the ratio of gross government debt to GDP will climb to almost 160% in Greece, about 125% in Ireland and around 115% in Portugal by 2012. Governments in all three countries have contingent liabilities related to explicit and implicit guarantees of banks which could raise government gross debt ratios even further. de facto … and the non-OECD area In China, output growth is projected to average a little over 9% over 2011-12. The near-term softening in the growth rate of GDP is projected to continue into the latter half of this year, with domestic demand damped by the effects of tighter monetary conditions, rising headline inflation and some near-term adverse effects from weakness in the Japanese economy. As these effects fade, domestic demand is expected to strengthen once more, helped by ongoing public investment in social housing. In India, further fiscal consolidation and continued monetary policy tightening should help GDP growth moderate to a more sustainable rate of around 8½ per cent per annum over the projection period. Domestic demand will remain a key source of growth, led by private investment underpinned by buoyant corporate sentiment and a need for higher infrastructure spending. In Brazil, domestic demand is also set to remain solid and be driven by large infrastructure and energy development programmes, although ongoing policy normalisation and continued small declines in net exports should help keep growth at trend rates. In Russia, domestic demand is projected to increase strongly, supported by the high level of commodity prices. Despite the drag from strong import growth and tighter monetary conditions, output growth is expected to be around 5% in 2011 and 4½ per cent in 2012. Headline inflation is being pushed up… Recent strong rises in commodity prices have helped to push up the annual rate of headline consumer price inflation to around 2¾ per cent in both the United States and the euro area this year ( ). In Japan, the headline inflation rate has now stopped declining for the first time in almost two years, although the planned rebasing of the consumer price index in August is expected to reduce the annual inflation rate by around ½ of a percentage point. The increase in headline inflation is even more marked in many emerging market economies, reflecting the greater weight of food and energy in total consumption in these economies and the greater energy intensity of production. There are also clear signs that underlying inflationary pressures are now building up in economies such as China, India, Brazil and Indonesia as a result of domestic capacity constraints. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. … and inflation expectations have drifted up Expected average rate of CPI inflation over the next 10 years for the United States, based on the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Expected HICP inflation rate five years ahead for the euro area, based on the SPF by the ECB. Expected average rate of CPI inflation six to ten years ahead for the United Kingdom based on Consensus Forecasts. Datastream; Agence France Trésor; University of Michigan Survey of Consumers; Citigroup; Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia; ECB; and Consensus Forecasts. Economic slack is becoming harder to gauge… OECD, Main Economic Indicators database; OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; and Datastream. … but underlying inflation seems likely to edge up only slowly ), with wage pressures remaining muted in most major economies, even as labour productivity is strengthening, reflecting continued labour market slack. In the United States, the annual rate of core inflation is projected to drift up from around 1% at present to just above 1½ per cent over the projection period. In the euro area, core inflation is expected to edge up from 1¼ per cent in the latter half of this year to 1½ per cent by the latter half of 2012. Deflation is expected to persist in Japan. These figures include price-level adjustments from indirect tax increases and higher administered prices, which are also pushing up the core inflation rate temporarily in the United Kingdom and several economies in the periphery of the euro area ( In the extreme case where VAT is levied on all items in the CPI at the standard rate and the increase is fully passed through into prices, a one percentage point increase in the rate of VAT would raise the level of the consumer price index by 0.8 to 1% depending on the initial rate. In practice, producers and distributors may reduce their margins to protect sales. A recent study based on UK experience puts the pass-through of indirect tax increases at 0.5 in the short term (Bank of England, 2010, and OECD, 2011c). By contrast, increases in administered prices have immediate effects. In the United States, increases in the tobacco tax in the first half of 2009 raised the annual CPI inflation rate by an estimated 0.2 percentage point. Since then, local governments facing fiscal difficulties have increased indirect taxes, including 1 or 1¼ percentage point increases in some state sales taxes, but these moves are too limited to have had any substantial effects on US-wide inflation. In the euro area, VAT revenue-raising measures have been taken by periphery countries in 2010 and 2011, with the current 12-month HICP inflation rate 0.4 percentage point higher than the rate measured at constant tax rates that Eurostat calculates with a method which holds the tax rate constant relative to the reference period (Box Figure). If the impact of increases in indirect tax rates has been the same on core inflation, fiscal measures would more than explain the increase in core inflation in the year to January 2011: excluding taxes and administered prices, core inflation in the early months of 2011 may have been close to ½ per cent. If taxes were excluded, core price levels would be broadly stable (Portugal) or falling (Greece, Ireland and Spain). In January 2011, the standard VAT rates have been raised by 2 percentage points in Portugal and two reduced VAT rates have been increased by 1 and 2 percentage points respectively in Greece. Given the weights of Portugal and Greece, these VAT increases are estimated to have raised euro area HICP inflation by 0.1 percentage point. In Japan, the effect of an increase in the tobacco tax in 2010 was more than offset by the elimination of tuition fees at public high schools. In the United Kingdom, the standard VAT rate has been raised by 2½ percentage points in January this year as well as last year and CPI inflation in March 2011 was 1.7 percentage points higher than when evaluated by consumer prices at constant tax rates. In Greece, the annual inflation rate is high, largely reflecting a 4 percentage point increase in the standard VAT rate in 2010, however, the HICP at constant rates indicates that the economy has actually fallen into deflation. In Spain and Portugal, headline HICP inflation rates are about 1 percentage point higher than evaluated at constant rates as a result of 2 and 3 percentage point increases, respectively, in the standard VAT rate since 2010. VAT rates have also been raised in other European countries such as Switzerland, Poland and the Slovak Republic in January 2011. ), and stronger labour demand is now gradually being met through new hiring rather than through an increase in hours worked, contrary to the first year of the recovery. Total OECD employment is projected to rise by around 1% this year and 1¼ per cent in 2012 ( ). With labour force participation rates expected to increase somewhat in most economies, after having held up better in the recent past than in earlier downturns, in part due to structural reforms such as the closing down of early retirement pathways out of the labour market, the OECD-wide unemployment rate is projected to decline to around 7% by the end of 2012 ( ). This would still leave a degree of labour market slack in most large OECD economies, helping to keep wage pressures in check, even allowing for the extent to which factors such as higher long-term unemployment and unemployment benefit extensions may have pushed up the natural rate of unemployment in some countries (Guichard and Rusticelli, 2010; Weidner and Williams, 2011). Germany is a striking exception. There, the unemployment rate is already well below pre-crisis levels, helped by earlier labour market reforms and the flexibility provided by short-time working accounts, and is projected to fall by a further percentage point over the projection period. The increasing tightness in German labour markets suggests that wage pressures might strengthen further beyond the projection period. In the United States, the unemployment rate is also projected to decline relatively sharply, reflecting stronger employment growth as well as the impact from the assumed phased reduction in the maximum duration of benefit eligibility through 2012. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Structural labour market policies have an important role to play in minimising the potential transformation of cyclical into structural unemployment. In contrast to earlier recessions and recoveries, this issue has now also become a concern in the United States, where there has been a long-run downward trend in the outflow rate from unemployment and the mean duration of unemployment remains historically high, with about 44% of the unemployed having been out of work for 27 weeks or more. Reforms that could help to foster near-term employment growth and minimise the employment cost of the recession are discussed in detail in External imbalances remain elevated… ). The US external deficit is projected to widen by just over ½ per cent of GDP, and the euro area in aggregate is projected to move into a small external surplus, with ongoing progress in reducing intra-area trade imbalances. The Chinese current account surplus is projected to be around 4½ per cent of GDP, well below earlier peaks, with adverse terms-of-trade effects and a more modest rate of improvement in export performance helping to keep the surplus lower than in the recent past. However, global imbalances will be kept elevated by the large rise projected in the external surpluses of the high-saving non-OECD oil-producing economies, on the back of the elevated level of oil prices. Whilst respending of oil revenues is likely to rise as a result, it will not be sufficient to reduce their surplus significantly. Much of the additional revenue accrued is likely to be saved, as appropriate for countries in which oil reserves are being depleted gradually. This is likely to remain particularly relevant beyond the short term, as oil prices are likely to rise as the resource is depleted. Current account balance, in per cent of world GDP OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. World trade remains robust and imbalances remain elevated … but could be narrowed by structural reforms A scenario analysis indicates that the necessary fiscal tightening required to stabilise debt-to-GDP ratios in OECD countries by 2025 could reduce the size of global imbalances – measured as the GDP-weighted sum of countries’ ratios of absolute saving-investment gaps to GDP – by almost one-sixth. If, in addition, Japan, Germany and China were to deregulate their product markets, aligning the level of economy-wide product market regulation with OECD best practice, and China were to raise public health spending by 2 percentage points of GDP (in a fiscally neutral way) and liberalise its financial markets, global imbalances could decline by twice as much (OECD, 2011a). Sizable exchange rate change is also incorporated in this scenario. On the upside… … the recovery may have more momentum… The possibility that the recovery in private sector final demand could gain greater momentum than projected, especially if household and business confidence were to strengthen further as the recovery progresses and lingering uncertainty about the durability of the recovery was to moderate still further. In particular, after a period of restraint, purchases of consumer durables, especially cars, could go above trend as household confidence strengthens. Scope also remains for business investment to expand more strongly than in the main projection. … and structural reforms could have short-run benefits On the downside, key risks stem from… … further increases in oil prices… A broadening of political instability in the MENA region could raise oil prices substantially further. As past episodes, such as the first Gulf War in 1990-91, have demonstrated, instability in a major oil producer can quickly lead to a large spike in oil prices, particularly as the short-run price demand and supply elasticities for oil are low and spare capacity can shrink rapidly. This would magnify the adverse effects on incomes and demand of the recent oil price increase (discussed above), whilst intensifying the upward pressures on headline inflation. Heightened geopolitical uncertainty could add to these downside effects and lead to a broader pull-back in risk taking in financial markets. Higher oil prices would also further widen global imbalances, by increasing the already elevated external surpluses of high-saving oil producing economies and possibly place downward pressure on real interest rates by altering the … a delayed recovery in Japan… … and a deeper slowdown in China Financial vulnerabilities could arise from exposures to sovereign debt in the euro area… ) and also, but to a more limited extent, in some larger countries (Belgium, Italy and Spain). Concern about the value of government bonds is tied closely to fears about banks’ solvency, reflecting the large exposures of many European banks to sovereign bonds, de jure de facto … and the United States and Japan… … and renewed weakness in housing markets… No. 79; van den Noord, 2006) suggested that real prices in several housing markets in the OECD area had become increasingly vulnerable to a change in financial and economic conditions, with the risk of a subsequent downturn becoming increasingly possible, as proved to be the case. With corrections in many, but not all, housing markets having now occurred, and, in some countries, prices having risen rapidly in the low interest rate environment, the issue of whether prices are now close to another turning point is again of considerable policy interest. For countries in which price corrections are still ongoing, it is useful to explore whether the correction will be completed and recovery will begin. For countries where corrections have been completed, or where corrections did not materialise, it is useful to examine when a (next) peak will be reached. As one means of addressing this issue, separate probit models have been estimated to provide an indication of possible peaks and troughs in real house prices in 2011 or 2012, using data for 20 OECD countries (Rousova and van den Noord, 2011). The definition of peaks and troughs used here is set out in the note of the accompanying table. The explanatory variables used in the models include the estimated gap between actual and trend real house prices, real house price growth in the recent past, the number of peaks in real house prices in other OECD countries, the interest rate, inflation, residential investment and the unemployment gap. To obtain the predictions, two different scenarios have been assumed. In the first (scenario 1), real house prices are assumed to be constant from the last observed quarter onwards (see main text, ). In the second scenario (scenario 2), real house prices are assumed to either fall or increase by 10% over the projection period – depending on whether prices are either falling or rising up to the last observed quarter. The path of the main explanatory variables used in the model is set to be consistent with the projections in this The main results from these exercises are summarised below (see also the Table). The range of scenarios applied provides some indication of the underlying robustness of the conclusions drawn, although false alarms can also be prevalent in these forms of models (Crespo Cuaresma, 2010). The main results are: The countries in which real house prices peaked prior to the financial crisis and have been in a downturn since are: Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States. Of these, Greece, Ireland and Spain are predicted to see troughs in 2011 or 2012 in both scenarios. For the two euro area programme countries, this result partly hinges on the assumed fall in bond yield spreads in the main projection (see The countries experiencing upswings in real house prices which have not yet been completed are: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Finland, France, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland. In Sweden, a peak in real prices is predicted to occur in 2011 or 2012 in both scenarios. Amongst the other countries in this group, a peak is signaled in Australia, Belgium, Canada, France and Norway only in scenario 2. There are two countries, Japan and Germany, where real house prices have been in long-term decline. In the case of Japan, there is a significant likelihood that real house prices may finally trough in scenario 2. For Germany, even though prices have picked up somewhat since 2008, the analysis does not signal a trough in either scenario. … and commercial property markets Macroeconomic and financial policy normalisation is required… … augmented by structural reforms Fiscal deficits remain high in many OECD countries… The stance of fiscal policy differs markedly across countries in the projections. In 2011, in line with government plans, the underlying budget deficit is projected to remain roughly stable in the United States. In Japan, where fiscal developments are surrounded by uncertainty about the scale, timing and financing of reconstruction spending, the OECD’s assumptions imply a modest decline in the underlying balance. By contrast, in the euro area and most other OECD countries sizable consolidation is projected ( In 2012, given the large degree of political uncertainty about fiscal developments in the United States, the OECD has assumed some tightening (see below), leaving a headline deficit of about 9% of GDP. A modest tightening has also been assumed in Japan, leading to a deficit of around 8¼ per cent. In most other OECD countries underlying balances are projected to improve in 2012, on the basis of official plans, with the budget deficit declining to close to 3% of GDP on average for the OECD area excluding the United States and Japan. Nonetheless, for most OECD countries, general government debt is set to continue drifting up as a proportion of GDP over the next couple of years as a result of large underlying deficits, still moderate economic growth and mounting interest payments. … requiring significant consolidation to arrest and reverse increases in the debt ratio , attaining pre-crisis debt-to-GDP ratios by 2026 would require improvements in underlying primary balances of 6½ per cent of (potential) GDP for the typical (median) OECD country, and 15% or more for inter alia ex ante Government financial assets consist commonly of securities, currency and deposits, loans and other assets. Shares of these categories vary considerably across the OECD countries (see first figure). Total securities are the largest category for most OECD countries, accounting on average for a half of total financial assets. They include mainly shares and other equity (an average 40% of total assets) and securities other than shares, like bills, bonds and certificates of deposit, whose nominal value is determined on issue (on average 10% of total assets). Following the System of National Accounts (SNA) convention, shares are valued at current market prices, and if those are not available they are estimated. Currency and deposits comprise on average 20% of total assets, while loans – mainly long-term – account on average for 10%. Other assets account on average for 20% of total financial assets. They include primarily financial claims that arise from timing differences between accrued transactions and payments made for items such as taxes, wages, interest, etc. In some countries, trade credits and advances as well as monetary gold and special drawing rights (SDRs) held outside the central bank are also important. OECD countries differ considerably with respect to the level of general government financial assets, with Finland, Iceland, Japan, Korea, Norway and Sweden recording levels in terms of GDP between 70% (Korea) to 200% (Norway) and the other countries around 40% of GDP (2009; see second figure). Accordingly, in 2009 the (unweighted) OECD average of net debt totalled 22% of GDP, while gross debt stood at 72% of GDP. In ten countries net debt was zero or even negative. In part, sizeable asset levels reflect the response to the financial crisis, as financial assets in the government sector increased substantially due to the recapitalisation or take-over of financial institutions. Indeed, financial assets increased by between 10 and 26% of GDP in Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom between 2007 and 2009. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. However, selling financial assets might not be desirable or immediately possible given market conditions, the composition of assets and policy objectives. Privatisation programmes should be based on cost-benefit analysis, taking into account existing market failures in the sectors involved and the potential for absorbing sales without excessive discounts, rather than be driven solely by debt-reduction objectives. In some cases, reserves have been built to cover future implicit liabilities related to pensions and thus should not be liquidated. Also, from a debt management perspective it may be prudent to hold assets as a cushion. In addition, it may take time before long-term loans are paid back. Consequently, it is difficult to assess the scope of asset sales, although in several countries the governments’ equity participations in banks are likely to be unwound over time. As a stylised illustration, the table below shows gross debt reductions, for countries with debt exceeding 75% of GDP in 2009 or being fiscally stressed, that would prevail if all securities, or all shares, were sold (Japan is not included due to missing data). For most countries, such sales would not be enough to reduce gross debt to pre-crisis (2007) levels. The situation is even worse when assessed on the basis of 2010 data, with gross debt in many of these countries estimated to have increased by more than assets. The scope for reducing gross debt would widen if non-financial assets were taken into consideration as well. They usually include residential and non-residential buildings, machinery and equipment (classified as tangible fixed assets), copyrights, patents, computer software (intangible fixed assets) and land (tangible non-produced assets). Data coverage is however very patchy across countries and across specific asset categories, as many governments do not have an appropriate inventory and the valuation of these assets at market prices is challenging. For those countries which publish complete data on non-financial assets (including Australia, the Czech Republic, France and the United Kingdom), these assets are much larger than financial assets. Clearly, as with financial assets, not all of them could and should be for sale. However, continuing fiscal stress in many OECD countries should be taken as an opportunity to evaluate if such assets should be sold. Greece is an example in this regard. Under the financial aid agreement, the Greek government has committed to compile a fixed-asset inventory and implement a privatisation and real estate development programme worth 50 billion euro (22% of 2010 GDP). Beyond current needs to lower gross debt, a full account of government non-financial assets is desirable also for a comprehensive assessment of government asset holdings and the efficiency of public asset use.  shorter maturity). Whether the real cost of debt servicing rises or falls depends on whether nominal interest rates increase by more or less than inflation. The first table below illustrates how the debt ratio changes with higher inflation given different debt turnover assumptions. This exercise assumes a permanent inflation increase of 1 percentage point which is immediately and fully reflected in all nominal interest rates. The calculations are done for a stylised economy that has initial debt and asset ratios of 100% and 25% respectively, with a real rate of growth and inflation in the baseline of 2%, and the cost of debt at 4% (see notes under the table). These parameters are stylised but correspond to projected characteristics of many OECD countries in the current decade. The assumed different debt repayment profiles attempt to reflect varied maturity structures in the OECD countries (see second table). For the sake of simplicity, the primary balance and the maturity structure do not react to higher inflation. In this setup, the inflation shock lowers the debt ratio after ten years by between 5 percentage points (with high debt turnover) and 9 percentage points (with low debt turnover). This result is primarily driven by the decline in the real stock of debt and the delayed pass-through of higher nominal interest rates to the actual cost of debt, stemming from the assumed debt turnover parameters. It suggests that a sustained increase in inflation by 2 percentage points would be required over a 10-year period to erode the average crisis-induced increase in the debt ratio in the OECD area, which totalled around 20 percentage points between 2007 and 2010. Impact of a 1-percentage point increase in inflation on the debt ratio after 10 years with different debt turnover parameters While there are economic benefits from lower real debt, resorting to higher inflation also involves many potential adverse effects that are not accounted for in the stylised calculations in the first table. High and persistent inflation could affect macroeconomic stability negatively and damp real growth by raising price and exchange rate volatility, reducing real money balances and increasing the dispersion of relative prices. The precise magnitude of these effects is however uncertain. In such an environment, it is also likely that investors would demand more short-term and inflation–indexed instruments. In some OECD countries, current maturities are already relatively short and the share of inflation-indexed bonds is not negligible (see the second table). In addition, there is large uncertainty regarding the authorities’ capability to generate higher, but still stable, inflation without de-anchoring inflation expectations. With de-anchored inflation expectations, interest rates paid on debt would likely increase more than inflation. Finally, persistent and high inflation may lead to a more widespread use of indexation contracts that are likely to magnify inflation shocks. Cottarelli and Viñals (2009) and Aizenman and Marion (2009). In the majority of OECD countries, phased consolidation has started either in 2010 or from the beginning of 2011, which appears appropriate given the unprecedented size of fiscal imbalances and the outlook for activity. In a few OECD countries (notably Estonia, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland) there is no or little need for consolidation. The situation is serious and consolidation prospects are uncertain… … in the United States… In the United States, after a long period of political discussion, legislation of the budget for fiscal year 2011 (which started in October 2010) passed Congress at the end of April. Based on this legislation, the underlying general government deficit is projected to remain roughly unchanged. However, there is no consensus on fiscal consolidation strategies, which casts doubt on the extent to which the President’s budget proposal for next year will be adopted. The US Congressional Budget Office estimated in March 2011 that the President’s budget proposal would reduce the federal deficit from 9.9% of GDP in 2011 to 7% in 2012 (CBO, 2011). The estimates incorporate the assumption that, as scheduled under current law, the provisions of the 2010 Tax Act terminate in 2012. Therefore, the projection assumes that the consolidation will amount to 1 percentage point of GDP, following standard procedures used in such circumstances ( … and Japan In Japan, the government’s Fiscal Management Strategy (FMS), announced in June 2010, aims to halve the primary deficit of the central and local governments by fiscal year (FY) 2015 and eliminating it by FY 2020. Towards this end, the FMS calls for keeping central government primary spending ( i.e.  excluding debt repayments and interest) in FY 2011-13 below the initial budget for FY 2010, and limiting bond issuance in FY 2011-12 to that in FY 2010. The initial reconstruction package announced by the government in April 2011 is worth 4 trillion yen (0.8% of GDP). Subsequent packages are expected later in FY 2011. If introduced, these could provide a near-term boost to the economy. The measures in the initial reconstruction package are to be financed without additional borrowing, in line with the authorities’ intentions of maintaining an unchanged level of bond issuance in FY 2011, largely by using budgetary reserves. Such a strategy is necessary in view of the serious fiscal situation, with gross debt at 200% of GDP in 2010. While Japan’s reliance on domestic financial investors, which hold some 95% of government debt, reduces the risk of a run-up in the risk premia on sovereign debt, weakening sovereign bond ratings point to increasing market concerns about the sustainability of the fiscal position. Even without additional borrowing to fund reconstruction expenditure, general government gross debt is projected to reach 219% of GDP in 2012. A more detailed medium-term consolidation plan, identifying the revenue and spending components to be employed to attain the stated targets, therefore needs to be elaborated urgently to put general government finances on a sustainable path. The medium-term consolidation plans should aim at a primary budget surplus that is large enough to stabilise the debt ratio rather than just a primary budget balance. As stated in OECD (2011b), the consumption tax should be the main source of additional revenue, given that it is low and its impact on economic activity is less negative than other taxes. Tax measures should be accompanied by social security reform that limits spending increases, including in health care, and addresses problems in pensions. In the euro area, a framework has been agreed to make government finances sustainable… In the euro area, against the background of heightened sovereign debt concerns, all governments have formulated multi-annual consolidation targets aimed at attaining a budget deficit of 3% of GDP or less by 2015 at the latest. In March 2011, heads of state and government in the euro area also agreed that the numerical benchmark for government debt reduction should be roughly equal to one-twentieth of the amount exceeding 60% of GDP per year, although not in a binding form. inter alia … though planned consolidation varies across countries… In the majority of euro area countries, including Germany, France and Italy, fiscal outcomes were better than expected in 2010. Targeted consolidation varies significantly across member countries, depending on their current situation: In 2011, particularly strong consolidation of 2½ per cent of GDP or more is necessary and planned in the countries that have asked for assistance from the EFSF and the IMF or are facing intense scrutiny in financial markets, followed by a consolidation of 1% or more of GDP next year ( By contrast, consolidation of ½ per cent of GDP or less is planned in both 2011 and 2012 in some of the countries with comparatively healthy public finances (Germany and Austria). The programmed reduction in the underlying structural deficit in France is close to the euro area average in both 2011 and 2012. In Italy, the programmed deficit reduction is smaller than the euro area average in 2011, but close to the average in 2012. In view of the high gross debt levels in these countries and required consolidation to bring the debt ratio to the reference value of 60% of GDP, it is important that the planned fiscal tightening is implemented. Vigorous consolidation is underway in the United Kingdom… In the United Kingdom, the government’s medium-term consolidation strategy aims to eliminate the structural deficit by FY 2014/15, with consolidation scheduled to be front-loaded. The consolidation programme strikes the right balance between addressing fiscal sustainability, thereby reducing tail-risks to fiscal positions and preserving growth (OECD, 2011c). The recent drift in inflation expectations indeed supports the front-loaded fiscal tightening. The automatic stabilisers should be allowed to operate, as envisaged in the government consolidation plan. … while consolidation needs vary in other OECD countries Consolidation efforts can be helped by structural reforms aimed at… Against the background of impaired fiscal positions and the moderate pace of the recovery, it is particularly important to implement structural reforms that facilitate fiscal consolidation, in addition to strengthening growth in the short and medium term (OECD, 2011a). … increasing employment… Reforms that could help to improve fiscal positions and foster employment growth without having strong negative effects on near-term activity include reforms to pension systems, incentives for early retirement and disability, sickness and unemployment benefits. Particular steps that could be taken include raising the retirement age, gradually tightening the eligibility criteria for sickness and disability benefits to exclude them being granted for labour market purposes and, once unemployment begins to fall, reducing disincentives to work embedded in unemployment benefit systems in some countries (notably many continental European economies). Secretariat estimates suggest that a 1 percentage point improvement in potential employment could improve government balances by between 0.3-0.8% of GDP (OECD, 2010). … reforming benefit and short-time work schemes… In the United States, the temporary extension of the duration of unemployment insurance benefits from 26 to 99 weeks, is estimated to have raised the US structural unemployment rate by between 1-1½ percentage points (Fujita, 2011; Mazumder, 2011). … raising productivity in the public sector… … and changing the tax structure Other structural fiscal reforms that could help to facilitate growth and improve welfare include reductions in tax expenditure and subsidies, the introduction of pollution-pricing mechanisms such as carbon taxes or the auctioning of emission permits, and the gradual implementation of revenue-neutral changes in the tax structure, away from taxes on corporate and labour income to higher taxes on consumption and, once housing market activity picks up, property (OECD, 2009). Based on 29 countries. Monetary policy settings are increasingly differentiated… … with striking differences between the United States and the euro area There are striking differences in both policy settings and communication across the major OECD economies, especially the United States and the euro area, in spite of underlying economic conditions that show many similarities, such as still-low underlying inflation, output gaps of sizable, albeit uncertain, magnitude and conflicting signals on the anchoring of inflation expectations from surveys and break-even rates. Indeed, given the differences in fiscal policies this year, developments in financial conditions and pre-existing levels of policy interest rates, there could even be grounds for suggesting that policy tightening in the United States should precede that in the euro area. Deflation risks have faded… … implying earlier moves to withdraw some monetary stimulus… … in the United States… In the United States, the asset purchase programme and the commitment of the Federal Reserve to an exceptionally low level of the policy rate for an extended period have contributed to the buoyancy of stock markets and tempered rises in long-term interest rates (Yellen, 2011). The still-elevated rate of unemployment and modest core inflation appear to be consistent with the decision to complete the quantitative easing programme in June. Nevertheless, with some signs that long-term inflation expectations have edged up, there is a strong case for an initial and visibly positive rise in the policy rate from mid-2011, followed later by a gradual reduction in the degree of accommodation as the recovery progresses and the extent of economic slack diminishes. In this set of economic projections, the target Federal Funds rate is assumed to be raised in a series of small steps by 100 basis points in the remainder of this year and, after a pause at this level to assess the impact on the economy, thereafter be increased steadily to reach 2¼ per cent by the end of 2012. Further increases in policy rates towards neutral levels would be likely soon thereafter, with the remaining output gap continuing to be eroded steadily. … in the euro area… In the euro area, against the backdrop of improving economic prospects and a pick-up in some measures of inflation expectations, the European Central Bank raised the main refinancing rate in April 2011. In the immediate future, there is little pressure to make additional moves, since, although headline inflation has risen above the ECB’s definition of price stability, core inflation rates are relatively low, especially once indirect tax changes are excluded. Moreover, a visibly positive level of money market interest rates now exists. During 2012, a gradual normalisation of the main policy rate would be warranted. In this set of projections, the main refinancing rate is assumed to be increaseed through 2012 to 2¼ per cent by the end of the year, still providing considerable stimulus in the context of remaining large, but increasingly uncertain, economic slack. … despite ongoing differences between euro area member countries… For the fragile financial systems in the latter countries, one option would be for the ECB to maintain special liquidity supports whilst raising policy rates (Minegishi and Cournède, 2010). At the same time, authorities in the larger countries should consider using macro-prudential tools to deal with excessively strong, country-specific asset-price growth, should it materialise. Over the medium term structural reforms in all euro area countries are necessary to enhance economic integration, thus increasing the benefits of the monetary union. … the United Kingdom… In the United Kingdom, earlier action is warranted, with the CPI inflation target of 2% having been overshot for the past 17 months and with some measures of inflation expectations having started to drift up. If the recent increases in long-term inflation expectations were allowed to become entrenched, the Bank of England could face difficulty in curbing the consumer price inflation rate. The Bank of England should therefore start to raise the policy rate soon, with the subsequent pace of monetary policy normalisation depending on the projected impact of strong fiscal consolidation on the economy and the speed at which economic slack is eroded. In the projections, policy rates are assumed to be raised to 1% by the end of 2011, and to then, after a pause, be raised gradually during 2012 to around 2¼ per cent by the end of the year. … and a continuation of withdrawal in other OECD economies… … but not in Japan In the wake of the earthquake and related events, the Bank of Japan provided ample funds to money market participants to prevent financial market instability. It also decided to supply longer-tem funds amounting to 1 trillion yen (0.2% of GDP) to financial institutions in disaster areas in order to support reconstruction efforts, and raised the size of the asset purchase programme from 5 to 10 trillion yen. Going forward, the current zero interest rate policy needs to be continued until inflation is firmly positive, especially given the uncertainty about the effect of the earthquake on economic slack. In the absence of signs of a clear trend toward achieving the 1% implicit inflation target, the Bank of Japan should stand ready to undertake further measures, focusing on reducing long-term interest rates through expanded purchases of government bonds. The first policy rate increase can wait until 2013 or later, occurring only when inflation is clearly set to reach about 1%. The potential accumulation of financial imbalances that could result from very low interest rates has to be monitored closely, but the Bank should be patient because of the risk of losing credibility in the event of having to return to zero interest rates soon after a premature policy rate increase. Given ongoing concerns about the health of the banking system in some countries, especially in the European Union, planned stress tests have an important role to play in providing reliable information on the extent to which banks can withstand adverse shocks. Compared with the 2010 EU-wide stress test, which failed to uncover vulnerabilities in some countries, the planned 2011 stress test will have a more demanding capital threshold based on Core Tier 1 capital instead of Tier 1 capital (which includes hybrid capital) and greater macroeconomic stress (though relative to a stronger baseline scenario). However, the adverse scenario regrettably excludes haircuts on sovereign debt held on banking books, which remains a sizeable risk. See also Blundell-Wignall and Slovik (2010). Looking further ahead, the implementation of the recently agreed Basel III capital requirements will strengthen bank loss-absorption capacity. Estimates in Slovik and Cournède (2011) suggest that in the three main OECD economies, banks may raise their target capital ratios by at least 3.7 percentage points, reducing the annual rate of GDP growth by 0.05 to 0.15 percentage point ( e.g.  Estimated medium-term macroeconomic impact of Basel III In principle, very strong capital buffers should reassure debt and money-market investors about a bank’s solvency, ensuring its access to funding. In practice, however, even under Basel III and additional national capital regimes, the equity cushion is unlikely to be large enough to secure continued liquidity at all times. Against this background, the Basel III framework will include liquidity requirements aimed at improving individual banks’ resilience to liquidity shocks. The Liquidity Coverage Ratio will require banks to hold the minimum level of high-quality liquid assets necessary to withstand an adverse liquidity stress scenario lasting for one month. The Net Stable Funding Ratio is a structural measure that requires banks to rely on stable medium to long-term funding instead of short-term money market financing. Although these requirements reduce the vulnerability of banks to liquidity risk, some concerns remain about their implementation. The liquidity requirements in their current form put a lot of emphasis on government bonds although recent developments have underscored that the safety and liquidity of government bonds cannot be taken for granted. The liquidity and stable funding requirements may also create incentives for regulatory arbitrage between different asset classes, as was the case with risk-weighted regulation in the run-up to the current financial crisis. Moreover, since the banking sector will require large amounts of medium to long-term funding, there is a risk that asset-liability maturity mismatches may emerge and create vulnerabilities elsewhere in the financial system. These caveats suggest that liquidity regulation should: avoid assuming that domestic government bonds are necessarily always fully liquid, especially for members of a currency union; rely on simple rules rather than overly complicated weighting schemes that could open new avenues for regulatory arbitrage; and be accompanied by adequate supervision of other parts of the financial system, including insurance companies, where potentially destabilising asset-liability mismatches could migrate to. Monetary and macro-prudential policies need close co-ordination… … but need not always be aligned Developments in Individual OECD Countries Supported by accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions the economy continues to recover gradually from the recession that ended a year and a half ago. Nevertheless, the adverse effects of the crisis are still being felt, particularly in the form of still-high unemployment. Output growth should gain speed and the unemployment rate should continue to decline through 2012 though the pace of expansion will be limited by household deleveraging and initial steps at fiscal consolidation. The economic recovery is continuing… Economic growth slowed in the first quarter of 2011 owing to a jump in energy prices and a temporary slackening in consumption growth at the turn of the year. Nonetheless, with financial conditions remaining accommodative, economic growth should gradually strengthen over the next couple of years, even as fiscal stimulus gives way to contraction. Further growth will slowly improve the labour market. The unemployment rate has already fallen in the pastcouple of quarters, although much of the reduction is attributable to falling labour force participation. Substantial employment gains are projected through the remainder of 2011 and in 2012, cutting the unemployment rate to 7½ per cent by the end of 2012, still well above pre-recession levels. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; Bureau of Economic Analysis and Federal Reserve. Household consumption growth increased steadily from late 2009 through the end of 2010 before slowing in the first quarter of 2011, as higher energy and food prices crimped budgets. Consumption growth should pick up again in coming months as employment strengthens, though increases are likely to remain moderate as households continue to reduce debts. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; Federal Reserve; United States Department of Commerce; Bureau of Economic Analysis and Datastream. Growth in business investment has slowed from the elevated pace of early 2010, but remains strong. Low interest rates and increases in corporate profits, which have nearly recovered the ground lost during the recession, should continue to support strong business investment growth despite capacity utilisation remaining below pre-recession levels. Real estate markets are still weak Residential investment increased modestly at the end of 2010, but a robust recovery in the sector remains some time off. The significant backlog of housing with delinquent mortgages or in foreclosure that have yet to be put on the market is diminishing slowly. However, it will continue to weigh on residential construction, housing prices and financial industry balance sheets over the next couple of years. Similar problems are affecting the commercial real estate market. Budget positions are poor at all levels of government, owing to both the effect of the recession and weak positions prior to it. Government support for economic growth is winding down and deficit reduction is likely to begin later this year. The general government deficit is assumed to fall from 10½ per cent of GDP in 2010 to 9 per cent in 2012. This is a much more moderate pace of fiscal consolidation than currently suggested by government plans, but has been assumed given the lack of political consensus on how to cut the deficit. Further progress to unwind fiscal imbalances beyond 2012 would require ambitious reforms of the tax system and entitlement spending, along the lines recommended by the President’s Fiscal Commission in late 2010. Following a considerable reduction from 6% of GDP in 2006 to 2¾ per cent in 2009, the current account deficit has begun widening again slightly as the fiscal deficit, consumption and investment growth have risen. The current account deficit is likely to continue to increase somewhat as consumption and investment rise, but the increase should be attenuated by the fall in the value of the dollar and the overall balance should remain much improved from its pre-recession levels. The 11 March 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake triggered the country’s worst disaster of the post-war era. The immediate impact has been to reduce output, although this is likely to be reversed by a strong recovery in the second half of 2011 led by reconstruction efforts. However, deflationary pressures are likely to continue through 2012, with unemployment remaining above its pre-2008 crisis level. Reconstruction spending in areas devastated by the earthquake and tsunami will be significant given the scale of destruction. With public debt exceeding 200% of GDP, it is important to finance reconstruction spending by shifting expenditures and increasing revenues. A detailed and credible fiscal consolidation programme, including tax increases and spending cuts large enough to achieve the government’s target of stabilising the public debt ratio by 2020, is a priority. The Bank of Japan should maintain an accommodative stance until underlying inflation is firmly positive. Japan’s expansion was back on track in early 2011… The earthquake and tsunami hit when Japan’s expansion appeared to be back on track, thanks to buoyant exports and improving labour market conditions, following the slowdown in the latter part of 2010. By early 2011, the unemployment rate had fallen to 4½ per cent, down from its record high of 5.4% in mid-2009, and the decline in the core consumer price index had slowed to 0.6% (year-on-year) from 1.5% in mid-2010. … when it was hit by the powerful earthquake and tsunami in March The Great East Japan Earthquake claimed around 25 000 lives and caused damage to social infrastructure, housing and private firms’ fixed capital that has been initially estimated by the government at between 3.3% and 5.2% of 2010 GDP. Moreover, significant damage to nuclear and thermal power plants reduced the electricity supply and created concern about radiation from the Fukushima plant. The disaster also disrupted supply chains, reducing output in parts of Japan that were not hit by the earthquake and tsunami, contributing to a 15% decline in industrial production (seasonally-adjusted, month-on-month) in March, the largest ever recorded. Consequently, the Bank of Japan’s April report downgraded its assessment of seven of Japan’s nine regional economies. The disaster also had an immediate impact on business and consumer confidence, which recorded its largest drop on record in March, as did the The ’’Economy Watchers’’ index, which includes workers such as taxi drivers and shop clerks, whose jobs are sensitive to economic conditions. Cabinet Office and Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry; OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database. Public reconstruction spending… The initial reconstruction package approved in May 2011 amounts to 4 trillion yen (0.8%) of GDP. It will be financed without additional borrowing, in line with the government’s goal of restricting bond issuance in FY 2011 to its FY 2010 level of 44 trillion yen (9% of GDP). Instead, it will be funded primarily by diverting the central government’s 2.5 trillion yen contribution to the basic pension system to reconstruction efforts and by reserves in the FY 2011 budget. The government’s budget deficit is projected to remain above 9% of GDP (excluding one-off factors) in 2011. While this financing plan avoids an increase in gross debt, it implies a reduction in government assets, thus boosting net debt. Additional reconstruction spending packages are expected in FY 2011, in line with the experience of the 1995 Kobe earthquake, which was followed by three supplementary budgets within one year. Even without additional reconstruction spending, gross government debt is projected to reach 219% of GDP in 2012, pushing Japan’s public finances farther into uncharted territory. … and measures by the authorities… The Bank of Japan reacted promptly following the disaster by providing liquidity on a large scale to stabilise financial markets. In addition, the Bank announced that it would double the size of its asset purchase programme to 10 trillion yen (2% of GDP) to prevent a deterioration in business sentiment and an increase in risk aversion. The authorities also intervened in foreign exchange markets in March as part of a multilateral commitment by the G7 countries to curb excess exchange rate volatility. This joint intervention immediately reduced the currency’s value relative to the dollar, which had risen to a record high, to around its pre-earthquake level and prompted a recovery in equity prices. … will help launch a recovery in the second half of 2011 The experience of past disasters in Japan and other developed countries suggests that the large negative impact on economic output in the first half of 2011 will be followed by a rebound as reconstruction spending picks up. In addition to public outlays, business and residential investment will increase as firms and households replace fixed capital and housing damaged in the disaster. In contrast to fixed investment, private consumption is projected to remain relatively subdued during 2011, reflecting weaker household confidence, as occurred following the Kobe earthquake. However, as residential investment gains momentum, private consumption, particularly for consumer durables, is likely to strengthen. These factors imply growth running at an average rate of around 4½ per cent during the second half of 2011. As public and private investment moderate following the completion of the 4 trillion yen initial package, the pace of output growth may slow to close to 1% by the end of 2012, leaving a large negative output gap. Consequently, headline inflation, which is likely to be positive in 2011 as a result of rising oil and commodity prices and the dislocations related to the disaster, may return to negative territory in 2012. The current account surplus is projected to fall from 3.6% of GDP in 2010 to around 2½ per cent in 2011-12, partly reflecting increased imports of oil to temporarily replace nuclear power. Uncertainty is exceptionally large GDP expanded at an average quarterly rate of 0.3% during the second half of 2010, despite a rundown of inventories and bad weather at the end of the year. Indicators point to strong growth in the near term. Private consumption and business investment have increased gradually, driven by stronger confidence and low interest rates. Exports have contributed strongly to growth, as world trade has continued to recover, boosted by rapidly expanding demand from emerging economies. Employment has expanded only modestly over the past year, however, and the unemployment rate remains close to 10%. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database and European Central Bank. While growth in the euro area as a whole has been picking up, some countries have lagged behind. GDP contracted in Greece, Ireland and Portugal during the second half of 2010 and there was a sharp fall in domestic demand in Spain. Output has remained weak in the early months of 2011. The contractionary short-run effect of rapid fiscal consolidation has added to weak private demand in most of these countries. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Headline annual inflation rose to 2.8% in April from 1.9% six months previously. The sharp increase was primarily due to a jump in energy prices. Over the past year, unusually large increases in indirect tax rates have contributed strongly to inflation. By contrast, annual inflation excluding food and energy prices, and at constant tax rates, has remained weak, consistent with the large degree of economic slack. Nominal hourly labour costs increased by just 1.6% during 2010 and available information on negiotated wages suggests further moderation in the short term. Inflation is likely to pick up only slowly, and the large degree of remaining slack suggests that the energy price increases will not trigger pronounced second-round effects. Monetary conditions have tightened slightly, albeit from a highly accommodative stance. The ECB’s main refinancing rate was increased by 25 basis points to 1.25% in April, while short-term interbank rates have been on a rising trend as a result of expectations of future rate rises and greater convergence of market rates with the policy rate. Three-month refinancing operations allocated with full allotment will continue, at least for the coming months. The euro effective exchange rate has appreciated modestly over recent months. Provided that the recovery continues and that underlying inflationary pressures remain weak, monetary policy stimulus should be withdrawn only gradually, and further increases in policy rates are not required immediately. Non-standard measures should continue to be wound down as conditions allow. The euro area government debt-to-GDP ratio is rising and passed 90% of GDP during 2010. Structural deficits must be brought down so that the debt burden can be stabilised and then reduced to more prudent levels. Fiscal consolidation is now underway in all countries, with consolidation particularly marked in countries with stabilisation programmes. Prolonged consolidation and tight public finances will be required for many years in numerous countries to meet the 60% ceiling set out in the Stability and Growth Pact. More credible and detailed multi-year plans need to be put in place. The commitment to consolidation would be enhanced by reforms to the Stability and Growth Pact and to national fiscal institutions, including by implementing and going beyond proposed reforms to the Pact. The agreed quantitative standard for debt reduction may help, but its effectiveness risks being undermined by the inclusion of other factors.The creation of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) has the potential to add to stability both in the near and longer term, although its credibility requires that banking system exposure to governments is well managed. The recovery is projected to continue to gain strength during 2011 and 2012. Consumption will accelerate as improving labour market conditions, low interest rates and higher confidence reduce saving, offsetting the headwinds from pressures on real disposable income due to tax increases and energy prices. Private non-residential investment will bounce back as growth prospects improve and spare capacity is gradually absorbed, assisted by more favourable financial conditions. Export growth will remain strong as export markets grow, even if the rate of expansion eases modestly and the effects of the stronger euro are felt. However, the required fiscal consolidation implies only very modest growth in government spending over the forecast horizon. Growth will also be held back by on-going balance sheet adjustment and rebalancing of demand in several countries. The growth rate of potential output, in the absence of further major structural reforms, would be lower than in previous recoveries, continuing past trends in productivity growth and reflecting the impact of demographic ageing. The export-led recovery is continuing, with domestic demand, notably business investment and private consumption, increasingly contributing to growth. Employment continues to rise and, coupled with wage increases, should support private consumption growth over the next couple of years. Growth is projected to slow somewhat in 2012 as the output gap closes during that year. Government finances have benefitted from strong economic growth with the deficit increasing only marginally in 2010, to 3.3% of GDP, by far the lowest among G7 countries. Nevertheless, government debt rose significantly in 2010, for the most part owing to measures to stabilise the banking sector. The consolidation measures that the government has appropriately put forward should be implemented as planned to bring down the budget deficit and meet the fiscal rule. Real GDP has accelerated sharply… The economy continues its robust rebound. After weakening at the end of 2010, due to adverse weather, growth bounced back strongly at the start of 2011. The underlying growth momentum accelerated, thanks to solid investment in machinery and equipment and rising export demand. Private consumption also contributed to growth, not least reflecting a reduction in households’ saving rates as the unemployment rate fell significantly below its pre-crisis lows. … and growth momentum is expected to remain strong Recent indicators suggest that growth will continue to be strong in the near term, though less buoyant than at the start of the year. Manufacturing orders increased further, with those coming from countries outside the euro area already reaching their pre-crisis levels. Business confidence remains at historically high levels, suggesting that any adverse growth effects from the earthquake in Japan – notably through supply chains – will be limited. As spare capacity is being reduced with the output gap closing fast, firms are increasingly undertaking capital-widening investment. While the currently high inflation rates, boosted by high energy and food prices, may hamper private consumption, higher but still moderate wage settlements and continued employment gains are likely to foster spending by households. Growth refers to that of real GDP. Exports are of goods and for 2011Q1 refer to January and February 2011. Even though firms both hoarded labour and substantially reduced hours worked during the downturn, employment grew faster than in most other major OECD economies in 2010 and had already reached its pre-crisis level by the middle of the year. This suggests that past labour market reforms that raised employment incentives continue to enhance labour market performance. Indeed, the structural unemployment rate is estimated to have kept falling throughout the crisis. However, with unemployment continuing to fall, the labour market is getting tighter and labour shortages are beginning to emerge in some sectors. This will lead to wage pressure and compensation per employee is projected to rise by around 3% in 2012, the highest rate since the mid-1990s. As a consequence, core inflation is likely to increase even as headline inflation falls back as the impact of energy and food price increases fades out. Eurostat; OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database. In 2010, the fiscal deficit was little changed as cyclical improvements, helped by one-off measures (such as the proceeds from a mobile phone frequency auction) almost fully offset expenditure increasing measures worth around 1% of GDP. At 3.3% of GDP, general government net lending in 2010 was by far the lowest among G7 countries. With continued above-trend growth and consolidation measures worth about 0.5% of GDP a year through 2014, the deficit is set to fall further. This consolidation is appropriate and well-timed given the cyclical position of the economy and is needed to meet the constitutional fiscal rule. Some of the announced measures, however, still need to be further specified. Despite the relatively good deficit position, public debt increased sharply in 2010 to over 80% of GDP, mostly reflecting the government’s assumption of risk assets and liabilities in connection with the setting up of resolution agencies for some banks. Financing this additional debt burden coupled with the rise in government bond yields will raise interest expenditures by around 0.3% of GDP. These developments, and the prospect of higher ageing-related spending, underline the necessity to keep public finances on a prudent track. Above potential growth is projected for 2012 The economy is projected to continue growing significantly above its potential growth rate (estimated at around 1½ per cent) in both 2011 and 2012. Growth will be boosted by the ECB monetary conditions, which are too loose given the rise in Germany’s nominal GDP. In particular investment spending, including residential investment, benefits from the current situation that is expected to prevail over the projection horizon. Even though quarterly growth in the remainder of 2011 will slow somewhat from the buoyant level in the first quarter, annual average growth is projected to reach around 3½ per cent. The main contributions will come from both investment spending, as firms expand capacity in view of the closing output gap, and exports, due to continued strong growth in the main export partners. Private consumption growth is also projected to accelerate, in particular once headline inflation rates decrease. In 2012, domestic demand is projected to contribute two-thirds to overall GDP growth of 2½ per cent on a working-day adjusted basis (annual growth in non-adjusted terms will be 2¼ per cent). A modest recovery is underway, but the recession will leave lasting traces. Real GDP is projected to grow by over 2% in both 2011 and 2012, led by business investment and exports. The unemployment rate is set to decline slightly towards 9% by the end of 2012. Substantial spare capacity is expected to limit any second-round effects of rising import prices, and underlying and headline inflation should converge to about 1½ per cent in 2012. The government’s fiscal consolidation trajectory is appropriate, but more efforts will be required down the road. The focus should be on curbing spending through bolstering public-sector efficiency and limiting health-care costs. Revenue increases could be achieved by broadening tax bases and raising environmental and property tax rates. Fiscal credibility needs to be reinforced through a meaningful institutional reform. Boosting potential output by addressing labour market weaknesses and continuing to enhance the supply side of the economy would help ease fiscal imbalances. Growth has been robust recently... Real GDP growth rose sharply and job creation moved up in the first quarter, and indicators point to prolonged strength, though at a slower pace. Part of the recent strength is due to temporary factors: weather conditions, which were a drag on activity at the end of last year, have been particularly favourable, while car orders related to the end of the 2010 scheme translated into robust consumption in the first quarter (due to lags in deliveries). So far private consumption and exports have been the main engines of the recovery, but business investment is now picking up speed after a moderate recovery in 2010. Workers registered at Pole emploi for more than 1 year (categories A, B and C). Workers aged 50 or more registered in Pole emploi’s A category, multiplied by 2. Dares; OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database. Monetary policy is still stimulative… OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database; Banque de France. … while the terms of trade weigh on income Sharply increasing commodity prices, although moderated by the euro’s recent strengthening, pushed up headline inflation, which reached 2.1% in April and will keep rising for a few more months. However, given the slack in the economy, second-round effects on core inflation should be limited. Against the background of a better-than-expected fiscal deficit in 2010, at 7% of GDP, the government maintained its commitment to reduce the deficit to 4.6% in 2012 and to 2% in 2014. Significant and decisive consolidation is warranted both to move the public finances back towards sustainability and to protect against jittery financial markets. Beyond 2014, the more ambitious objective of eliminating the deficit entirely is called for in order to bring down debt at an appropriate pace. For 2011, the structural balance is expected to improve by almost 1% of GDP thanks to the disappearance of self-reversing policies included in the anti-crisis package, as well as cuts in tax expenditures and current spending. Other actions include a public sector pay freeze, the non-replacement of half of all retiring workers in central government, an increase in capital gains taxation and a new tax on banks. Broadly in line with government objectives, the projection assumes a further reduction in the total deficit from 5.6% in 2011 to 4.6% of GDP in 2012; however, the precise steps that will bring it about should be spelt out quickly. As France is entering a pre-election period, uncertainty as to the achievement of planned consolidation is increasing. Most of the consolidation effort in France must come from restraining spending. Extending the General Public Policy Review to all levels of public administration and shrinking programmes that are not cost effective will be key. Consolidation of small municipalities and elimination of departments could generate substantial economies of scale. Considerable savings could be made without impairing the quality of the health-care system by reducing the frequency and length of stays in hospitals, lowering administrative costs and expanding the use of generic drugs and capitation-based physician compensation. To the extent increased revenues are needed, tax expenditures should be cut further, including on saving schemes. Also, raising taxes on environmental externalities, such as carbon emissions, as well as others that are the least distortive – in particular, taxes on property and the VAT – should be considered. The need for a clean break with the past management of fiscal policy is increasingly recognised, but institutional reform, currently under discussion, is needed. A stronger fiscal framework – consisting of a structural deficit rule, detailed multi-year budgeting and an independent fiscal council through a constitutional reform – could lock in the political commitment and anchor long-term credibility. Structural reforms that boost employment and bolster growth would also greatly contribute to restoring public finances. Efforts should focus on overcoming job-market weaknesses and continue to put the accent on the supply of output. Real GDP growth is projected to increase from 1.4% in 2010 to 2.2% in 2011 and 2.1% in 2012, notwithstanding ongoing fiscal consolidation. Private investment and exports should be buoyant, helped by accommodative credit conditions and robust global activity, including stronger German domestic demand. Unfortunately, the unemployment rate is likely to decline only moderately, while price pressures will remain subdued, with underlying inflation remaining well below 2%. With indebted owner-occupier households in a healthy solvency position, there is no need for major deleveraging. Private consumption should thus continue to be supportive, with the saving rate easing to its pre-crisis level as lower joblessness and a shrinking public deficit work to restore household confidence. Given the waning terms-of-trade deterioration, the current account deficit should plateau at around 2.6% of GDP. Italy’s slow recovery is projected to continue with growth strengthening somewhat to around 1½ per cent in 2012. Buoyant world demand will stimulate the export sector and investment growth should re-accelerate too. Unemployment will fall only slowly, partly because the initial improvement in labour demand will be absorbed by reduced use of short-time working. After picking up quite sharply recently, headline inflation is expected to fall back as the impact of increases in energy and food prices diminishes. After achieving a lower budget deficit than planned in 2010, the government is maintaining its previous fiscal targets for 2011 and 2012. This requires, as assumed in the present projections, continued tight control of expenditure and further improvements in tax collection. Such vigilance is necessary because of the high debt-to-GDP ratio, even though this is set to decline in 2012, and the likely increase in the cost of debt service as long-term interest rates climb in the medium term. The government’s National Reform Programme contains an impressive list of priorities for reform; this must be effectively implemented to enhance the economy’s potential to reduce the debt burden through growth. The Italian economy continued to recover during 2010, though at an uneven pace and with some slackening at the end of the year. The strong growth in industrial production of the first half of 2010 gave way to a period of sluggish performance through the winter months, as investment demand may have been damped by the ending of fiscal incentives in mid-2010 and production in important partner countries was cut by severe weather. Even so, imports and exports grew much faster than overall domestic activity. In the year to February 2011, growth in goods export volumes considerably outpaced that of imports, though falling terms of trade, as oil and other commodity prices rose substantially, kept the balance of trade in deficit. Institute National of Statistics (INSTAT) and OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Despite weaker output during the winter, confidence in manufacturing companies has continued to improve and is not far below the levels reached before the crisis, although these were not particularly high. By contrast, indicators of consumer confidence have been broadly stable or tending to decline since the high levels reached in early 2010. Bank lending continues to accelerate, while there has been no change in overall credit conditions; a number of banking groups successfully raised equity capital in early 2011. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. As in some other European countries, labour productivity fell substantially during the recession and Italy’s slow recovery has done little to raise productivity growth subsequently. The impact of low productivity growth, and the low or negative rate of natural increase in population, have been offset to some extent by high levels of immigration of people of working age. Net immigration has been running at around 400 000 people a year in the past 3 years, while longer term projections by Eurostat are for average flows over the period 2005-60 of about 220 000 people per year. Unemployment has stabilised and wage growth has drifted down a little Labour market slack may have begun to shrink as unemployment began to fall from its peak in October 2010. Use of the short-time working compensation scheme, the , has been diminishing as well. However, labour participation has also resumed its decline after showing signs of beginning to recover in the autumn of 2010. Growth in contractual wages has gradually fallen, to around 2% by March 2011. This is similar to wage growth in Germany despite Italy’s weaker competitive situation and lower productivity growth. Headline price inflation has been rising, as elsewhere, under the influence of energy and commodity prices. It reached 2.5% in March, while core inflation, though it has increased slightly, remained more subdued, at 1.7%. A Bank of Italy survey of companies in December 2010 showed that their expectations of inflation have also been increasing, though inflation was still expected to be only just over 2% over the next one to two years. There was a significant improvement in the budget deficit in 2010, as it fell from 5.3% of GDP in 2009 to 4.5% in 2010, lower than the government’s target of 5%. This good performance has helped to contain interest rate spreads against Germany, although there has been some volatility. A sharp fall in public investment was an important contributor to improved government finances, while public consumption also declined and interest payments were lower than planned. The government’s new Stability Programme confirms the deficit targets of the previous programme for 2011 (3.9% of GDP) and 2012 (2.7%). These should now be easier to achieve given the improvement already seen in 2010. It is notable that fiscal projections are based on lower, more prudent, growth expectations than previous Programmes. The Stability Programme also confirms that the government will seek to bring the budget into approximate balance by 2014. This is an important objective if the debt-GDP ratio is to be brought down in the medium term, especially as rising long-term interest rates are likely to generate an increase in the cost of debt service as existing debt is rolled over. In the short term, growth is projected to pick up after a weak start to 2011. Strong growth in world trade should support exports; the investment cycle, though rather weak, will also support demand. Private consumption is likely to grow in line with incomes, as little change in the saving ratio is expected, while public consumption and investment will remain very subdued. Investment has been weaker than expected earlier and, with the possibility of a partial reversal of the strong stockbuilding in 2010, the first half of 2011 could be quite weak. Thereafter Italy should benefit eventually from world trade growth and the investment cycle could then turn out to be even stronger than projected. In contrast, continuation of recent strong increases in commodity prices could weaken prospects for growth. Prolonged turmoil in the euro area periphery might also affect investment prospects negatively. The recovery paused in end-2010 and growth is projected to remain weak in 2011, despite rising exports and business investment, but to pick up in 2012. Above-target inflation, driven by tax increases and commodity prices, and needed fiscal consolidation, will hold back private consumption and public spending during 2011-12. Inflation will remain above the 2% target through 2011 and most of 2012, but is set to fall when the effects of the tax increases and rising import prices wane. As inflation falls, private consumption should start to recover. Unemployment is likely to increase in the short term, reflecting the slow recovery and rising labour force participation. The current fiscal consolidation strikes the right balance and should continue in line with the government’s medium-term plan to eliminate the deficit, while allowing the automatic stabilisers to work. An upward harmonisation of VAT rates combined with higher infrastructure spending would lower the short-term negative growth effects of consolidation without affecting its pace. Further reforms to improve public sector efficiency and increasing the effective retirement age would mitigate fiscal pressures. Monetary policy should remain expansionary over the forecast period to support activity in view of the tightening fiscal stance. However, normalisation of interest rates will need to start during 2011 to stave off significant increases in inflation expectations. The recovery started in 2009, but output fell in late 2010, hit by severe weather in December and growing headwinds from rising inflation and fiscal consolidation. Growth resumed in early 2011, but at a moderate pace, as government spending was stagnant and household real incomes fell due to above target inflation. Notwithstanding fiscal consolidation, domestic demand will pick up, though only slowly, as business investment rises and, once inflation subsides, household consumption strengthens. Exports have risen significantly but continue to underperform relative to other OECD countries despite a significant depreciation of the pound, reflecting limited improvements in relative export prices and still falling financial service exports. Employment started to rise during 2010, but rising labour force participation due to demographic factors has left the unemployment rate virtually unchanged since mid-2009 at slightly below 8%. Changes compared to 2008Q1. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Financial conditions remain highly expansionary and access to credit for firms and households continues to improve. Credit growth continues to be subdued, however, mirroring weak demand from households and firms. CPI inflation is still above 4%, reflecting lingering effects of the depreciation of the pound, VAT increases in 2010-11 and rising oil and food prices. Inflation expectations remain elevated, illustrating concerns about the Bank of England’s willingness to tolerate significant and persistent deviations from the 2% target. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database, Bank of England and Office for National Statistics. The fiscal deficit peaked at almost 11% of GDP in 2009, but has started to shrink as a consequence of consolidation. The government intends to achieve a cyclically adjusted current balance (that is, excluding net public investment) by the end of the 2015/16 budget year. The planned annual fiscal contraction between 2010 and 2012, which is built into these projections, amounts to roughly 1.6% of GDP. The fiscal deficit is projected by the OECD to fall to 7.1% of GDP in 2012, while gross public debt is expected to reach 93% of GDP. The recovery will gain strength in 2012 Growth is projected to remain slow during 2011. Public consumption and investment are set to fall significantly, while household consumption is expected to stay subdued, reflecting falling real incomes and stagnant asset prices. Further increases in exports, supported by rising global demand, the low exchange rate and a fading drag from financial service exports will eventually underpin a somewhat stronger recovery in 2012. Business investment has fallen to low levels and will gather further pace in 2012, partly in response to rising exports. With weak domestic demand, imports will grow slowly and the current account deficit is expected to narrow through 2012. The labour market will worsen in 2011 The sluggish growth is likely to temporarily halt the recovery in employment. As labour supply continues to grow, unemployment is therefore set to edge up. As activity picks up during 2012, employment growth should resume and unemployment should start to fall. The labour market recovery will be weak, however, owing to subdued GDP growth, declines in public employment and remaining scope for increases in working hours and productivity gains. Wage settlements and wage growth remain restrained, reflecting significant economic slack. Inflation will remain above 4% in 2011 Inflation is set to remain above 4% all through 2011, due to the low exchange rate, VAT increases and significant price increases for oil and food. The impact from these factors should wane in 2012. A significant output gap and slow-growing unit labour costs are then expected to generate a slowdown in inflation to below the 2% target during the latter part of 2012. With the Bank of England’s policy rate close to zero and quantitative easing amounting to £200 billion (14% of GDP), monetary policy remains highly expansionary. This is appropriate as inflation is expected to fall in 2012. Nevertheless, a modest increase in interest rates should be taken during 2011 to stave off increases in inflation expectations, which are already elevated. As the recovery gathers momentum in 2012, the pace of normalisation of interest rates should be stepped up. A winding-down of quantitative easing should commence once policy rates have increased measurably, probably later than 2012. Substantial risks and uncertainty surround these projections. The extent to which the economic developments in late 2010 and early 2011 can be attributed to extreme weather conditions, volatility in measured activity in construction, the increase in the VAT rate and international developments remains unclear. The fall in household disposable incomes may bear down more on consumption than projected. Risks to the export sector are significant on both sides of the baseline projection. Whilst a further weakening in financial service exports remains a downside risk, exports, and therefore investment, may recover more quickly than projected in response to the weak pound. The economic recovery has gained firmer traction as real GDP accelerated in the final quarter of 2010 and into early 2011. Manufacturing activity has begun to expand rapidly following a sharp inventory drawdown at the end of 2010, and industrial capacity utilisation has been gradually increasing for several quarters. Strengthening business-sector confidence, credit growth and profitability are progressively returning private non-residential investment towards pre-recession levels. While the unemployment rate and average hours worked have yet to fully recover, employment has risen substantially, particularly in full-time and private-sector work. This, along with terms-of-trade gains, has bolstered household income and underpinned consumption spending. Government consumption and investment under the fiscal stimulus programme also continued to contribute significantly to growth in the final half of 2010. Export volumes rebounded vigorously at end-2010, buoyed by a firming global appetite for Canadian commodities and some temporary factors, but have moderated in early-2011. Spending on machinery and equipment over the next 12 months. Thomson Datastream; OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Robust growth in emerging market economies combined with a number of supply shocks have driven up the world price of commodities, boosting the terms of trade and demand for exports. A recovering US economy is expected to reinforce the profile of exports, although the high value of the Canadian dollar should continue to depress profitability and international competitiveness in the export-oriented manufacturing sector. Given relatively sluggish labour productivity, the languid performance of non-commodity exports in world markets is likely to persist. Providing some offset, the strong exchange rate should nevertheless lower the cost of imported machinery and equipment and encourage capital spending. With firms benefiting from improving credit conditions, sound financial health and lower tax rates, business investment should remain an important driver of growth. Investment intentions appear especially strong in the energy sector, which is enjoying high world prices. Thomson Datastream; OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. The shift to fiscal contraction, and in particular the trimming of public-sector compensation, will weigh on household income. Household debt inched up to a record 149% of disposable income in the last half of 2010, continuing its longer-term upward trend. Although deleveraging needs are not as severe as in some other OECD countries that experienced housing booms, substantial debt burdens should nonetheless damp consumer spending in the near term. Indeed, growth in consumer and mortgage credit has already eased substantially since mid-2010. The higher purchasing power afforded by the strong exchange rate is not expected to affect consumption growth significantly, given that households are simultaneously facing higher food and energy bills as a result of soaring world commodity prices. Consumers are unlikely to be able to rely on further significant increases in house prices to improve their balance sheets. House prices are already high relative to incomes and rents, and the market appears to have stabilised and may cool. In particular, in mid-March a new set of changes tightening mortgage insurance regulations came into effect (the third since October 2008), including a shortening in the maximum amortisation period by an additional five years. Fiscal stimulus is gradually being withdrawn in 2011, although plans announced in late 2010 extended the deadline for completion of some infrastructure projects. The draft 2011-12 pre-election federal budget included some new spending measures, funded by greater-than-expected revenues in 2010 and a stronger growth outlook. The projection assumes that consolidation is implemented as planned, and that the total government deficit will fall from 5.5% of GDP in 2010 to 3.5% in 2012. However, achieving these plans will require significant expenditure restraint compared to the previous decade, which will entail curbing public-sector compensation and defence spending. At the provincial level, priorities should include achieving operational efficiencies in health care and providing details on other planned measures based on strategic reviews, which are underway. The brisk pace of growth in early 2011 is expected to moderate over the near term before regaining speed in 2012. The natural disaster in Japan should temporarily curb production and trade this spring, particularly in the automotive sector, although this should be offset by a catch-up in activity later in the year. Consumption growth is projected to slow over the remainder of the year as the housing market cools and households rebuild their stretched balance sheets. As firming labour markets support wage growth, consumption should pick up again in 2012. Business investment should remain robust, and exports are projected to contribute more solidly to growth especially as the US recovery strengthens. The output gap should thus narrow significantly over the projection but remain large enough to hold underlying inflation to about 1½ per cent per year. Risks surrounding the outlook are considerable, though broadly balanced. The widespread fiscal contraction across many advanced economies, and especially in the United States, may weaken external demand more than projected. Persistent geopolitical instability may meanwhile lead to unsustainable commodity price increases, which would help Canadian exporters but may also raise inflation expectations, forcing a more rapid tightening of monetary policy than assumed. Such a scenario could trigger a more marked house price correction that significantly strains household and bank balance sheets. An unexpected decline in commodity prices would have the opposite effects. The Australian economy is set to rebound after the disruptions caused by major natural disasters in early 2011. Growth, driven by historically high terms-of-trade, should accelerate from 3% in 2011 to 4½ per cent in 2012. Unemployment is projected to fall, although the remaining slack in the economy will mute the risk of inflation pressures. Growth in the Australian economy slowed in the second half of 2010 to 2½ per cent year-on-year. The economic impact of tighter monetary policy in 2010, the appreciation of the exchange rate, and the gradual withdrawal of the budgetary stimulus was only partially offset by the rebound in private demand buoyed by higher terms-of-trade. In early 2011, the country was hit by major flooding and a cyclone and the economic impact of earthquakes in Japan and New Zealand. These shocks reduced output and demand, particularly exports, cutting GDP by up to 1% in the first quarter. Despite these disruptions, the business climate remains positive. Mining commodity prices are at historical highs and firms have again revised their investment plans upwards. In contrast, households, whose confidence was declining in early 2011, have continued to rein in consumption and reduce their debts. By April 2011, employment had recovered to pre-disaster levels in the regions most affected by the rains and flooding, and the unemployment rate had fallen to 4.9%. Underlying inflation remained moderate, however, at 2¼ per cent in the first quarter of 2011 because of the easing of demand and the exchange rate appreciation. Headline inflation, pushed by strong rises in fruit and vegetable prices stemming from the recent adverse weather events, rose to 3¼ per cent. OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database and Reserve Bank of Australia. The RBA raised its cash rate in 2010, bringing it up to 4.75% in November. This, together with the exchange rate appreciation, has given monetary policy a slightly restrictive stance. Against this background, demand for credit has remained weak. The current stance of monetary policy seems appropriate. However, inflation pressure might emerge because of potential second-round effects of weather disruptions and of oil price hikes and of the acceleration in growth from the second quarter of this year onward, which could induce bottlenecks in some parts of the economy. The public sector deficit, which rose to almost 6% of GDP in 2010, was a little worse than expected due to the weakening of growth in the second half of last year. The flooding has generated additional budgetary costs of around ½ per cent of GDP, which will be financed by a temporary increase in direct taxes on middle and high-income households and the cancellation or deferment of some government spending. The 2011/12 Budget confirms the authorities’ commitment to pursue a restrictive fiscal policy to return to surplus by as early as 2013. To this end, budgetary savings amounting 1½ per cent of GDP have been identified over the next 4 years, with the removal of some tax expenditures and a better targeting of family benefits. The budget also includes several measures to promote labour participation and training, which should have beneficial effects on growth over the medium term. The weaker growth resulting from the natural disasters should be offset by a rebound in activity from the second quarter of 2011 onwards, driven by the rebuilding of destroyed infrastructure. GDP growth, supported by exports and investment, should exceed 4% in 2012. High terms-of-trade continue to favour the mining sector, which has a knock-on effect on the economy. Lower unemployment and higher employment and labour incomes should result in a gradual firming of private consumption. Notwithstanding strong growth, the output gap is estimated to remain through 2012, which will hold down inflationary pressures. Investment growth picked up strongly in the second half of 2010 and will continue to support the export-led recovery. The labour market continues to improve but large increases in inflation will weigh on consumption. After a strong first quarter of 2011, growth is projected to slow down to its trend rate. Economic growth remained strong in the first quarter of 2011. With capacity utilisation close to long-term averages, the export-led recovery spilled over to investment. In particular, investment in the metals and machinery sector expanded strongly, more than offsetting further declines in construction. Consumption grew steadily but at a subdued rate. Recent high-frequency business and consumer confidence indicators suggest that a slowdown is expected for the near future. The labour market has improved and inflation has picked up strongly The labour market recovered quickly from the crisis with employment growing robustly and the unemployment rate falling to 4.2% in the fourth quarter of 2010, compared with a crisis peak of 5.1%. Wage growth remained subdued, however, supporting Austria’s competitiveness. Harmonised consumer price inflation increased sharply at the beginning of 2011 reaching 3% (year-on-year) in the first quarter, mainly due to global energy and food prices, and to excise tax hikes on tobacco and mineral oil products. Core inflation also rose somewhat, to 1.8% in the first quarter. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; OECD, Main Economic Indicators database. Foreign demand and investment are driving growth… Through its strong trade linkages with Germany, Austria is expected to continue to benefit from robust external demand. The full opening of the labour market to the new EU member countries on 1 May 2011 is likely to ease skill shortages, reducing the scope for more than moderate wage increases. With further increases in labour productivity towards trend, this will support future competitiveness gains. Despite an expected gradual tightening of monetary policy in the euro area, real interest rates are set to remain low in 2011 and will support investment in the near term. … while consumption remains subdued Employment growth is expected to remain robust in 2011 before moderating somewhat in 2012, keeping the unemployment rate below the structural level of 4¼ per cent. However, high consumer price inflation will weigh on real disposable income and private consumption growth in 2011. Inflation is expected to decline in 2012, supporting a moderate pick-up in consumption. Fiscal vulnerabilities have risen following increases in the deficit and the debt during the recession. The situation has become more apparent after comprehensive revisions by Eurostat forced parts of the hitherto off-budget deficit and debt items of the railway company and hospitals back onto public balance sheets. The federal government is implementing a consolidation package to reduce the deficit to below 3% of GDP by 2013, with savings of about Ä on the revenue side (mainly increases in excise taxes and a bank levy) and Å on the spending side (mainly social expenditure cuts). In this projection, which builds in fiscal consolidation in line with government plans, the deficit falls to 3.7% of GDP by 2011 and 3.2% of GDP by 2012. However, in view of diminishing slack in the economy, a greater front-loading of consolidation would be warranted. The recovery is set to gather pace Strong growth at the beginning of 2011 softened due to higher oil prices and some disruption to the supply chains in the automotive industry. Nonetheless, the slowdown is expected to be short-lived. The economy continues to benefit from supportive monetary policies and robust world trade growth. Industrial production continues to grow sufficiently fast to markedly reduce excess production capacity. The savings rate remains high, suggesting there is still room for renewed consumption growth. The improving labour market should also support consumption. Employment growth has averaged around 1% per quarter (seasonally adjusted annual rate) since the beginning of 2010, reflecting mostly higher labour demand. Unemployment peaked in mid-2010 at a harmonised rate of 8½ per cent, before coming down by about ¾ percentage point by spring 2011. Inflation rose to 3½ per cent in early 2011 as the impact of higher energy prices came through faster and stronger (reflecting relatively high energy use) than in other European countries. Unlike in many other countries, however, there has also been a pick-up in underlying inflation, which increased from 1% in spring 2010 to nearly 2% a year later. To a large extent, this reflected the triggering of the automatic wage indexation in the autumn of 2010. The 2011-12 wage agreement yielded zero ex ante real wages increases for 2011 and 0.3% in 2012. However, automatic wage indexation will translate relatively high Belgian inflation into higher nominal wages, intensifying inflationary pressures and eroding external cost competitiveness. OECD, Main Economic Indicators and OECD Economic Outlook 89 databases. The 2010 general government deficit of just above 4 per cent of GDP was more than ½ percentage point better than expected, reflecting mostly a positive growth surprise. The 2011 budget stipulates fiscal tightening of about ½ per cent of GDP, reflecting a number of small measures. For 2012, these projections build in the Stability Programme’s planned 1% fiscal consolidation, with an even split between revenue raising measures and spending cuts. Against the background of stronger economic growth, this should secure a budget deficit of about 3½ per cent of GDP in 2011 and below 3% the following year. If, as planned, similar consolidation efforts are implemented in the following years, then the medium-term objective of achieving a small budget surplus in 2015 is within reach. Such an achievement would be an important step towards securing fiscal sustainability, but will require a concerted effort by all governments in the federation. Moreover, further consolidation will be needed beyond that to ensure a reduction of the high debt-to-GDP ratio. Growth should gather pace later in 2011, supported by stronger private demand, particularly for investment goods. Employment will continue to expand, but only in 2012 will the unemployment rate fall significantly further. The main downside risk is that still higher global commodity prices would widen the inflation and labour-cost wedge The Chilean economy is growing strongly, driven by dynamic domestic demand with support from high copper prices. GDP growth is expected to reach 6½ per cent in 2011 and gradually slow towards 5% in 2012, as monetary and fiscal policies tighten. In the near term, the main challenge for macroeconomic policy will be to avoid overheating. As there are signs of rising inflationary pressures, monetary policy should continue moving toward a neutral stance during 2011 to keep inflation expectations well anchored. The government announced spending reductions recently to counter the strong appreciation of the exchange rate related to exceptionally high copper prices. At the same time, its objective of reducing the structural budget deficit to 1% of GDP by 2014 is rather modest, even taking reconstruction spending needs into account. Letting the exchange rate float and achieving a more ambitious fiscal target should cool internal demand and avoid inflationary pressures. Historically high copper prices and increasingly strong domestic demand are supporting swift growth of the Chilean economy, after a partly reconstruction-led rebound following last year’s earthquake and tsunami. Private consumption has been particularly dynamic on the back of favourable consumer confidence, normalised financial conditions and falling unemployment. Investment has expanded strongly as a result of reconstruction efforts and strong mining investment. The current account surplus has declined, as imports grew fast along with domestic demand, but thanks to high copper prices it has remained in positive territory in 2010. The strong growth in output and rapid pace of employment creation has quickly diminished excess capacity contributing to strong nominal wage growth. High international food and oil prices are adding to inflationary pressures. Inflation expectations for one year ahead have risen above the mid-point of the central bank’s inflation tolerance range of 3% (+/- 1%) according to the central bank financial experts’ survey, even though the peso appreciated 23% above its long-term average against the dollar in the second half of 2010. Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (INE); Central Bank of Chile. The central bank has raised the monetary policy rate by 225 basis points since October, to 5.0% in May 2011. To smooth the peso appreciation, and accumulate international reserves, the central bank is implementing the largest foreign currency purchase programme in Chilean history. The central bank plans to continue raising its policy rate to reach a neutral level by the end of 2011. The monetary authorities should closely monitor inflation developments and consider tightening even faster if needed. Thanks to a strong recovery and high copper prices the headline budget deficit decreased rapidly from 4½ per cent of GDP in 2009 to ½ per cent of GDP in 2010. The government plans to increase spending by 5.4% in real terms in 2011 relative to 2010, to continue reconstruction and expand a number of social programmes. Spending growth is expected to slow in 2012 as reconstruction tapers off. Over the longer term, the government aims to reduce the structural fiscal deficit to 1% of GDP by 2014. This fiscal tightening is modest in a context of strong economic growth and rising inflationary pressures. Reconstruction permitting, Chile should consider tightening the fiscal stance faster to reduce the risk of overheating and ensure fiscal sustainability. GDP growth should reach 6½ per cent in 2011 and moderate in 2012 towards its long-term potential of roughly 5% as macroeconomic stimulus is withdrawn. Inflation is projected to continue rising during 2011 and to overshoot the upper bound of the central bank’s target range towards end 2011. Inflation should then moderate as the stimulus from reconstruction spending is withdrawn and the central bank increases monetary policy rates rapidly. Despite ongoing fiscal tightening real GDP growth is expected to reach 2.4% this year, driven primarily by strong foreign demand. Growth will broaden and rise further to 3.5% in 2012, as consumption picks up. Headline inflation will spike temporarily due to scheduled indirect tax increases in 2012, but core inflation will remain low given the remaining output gap. GDP expanded by 2.2% in 2010, reflecting strong export performance and restocking as the Czech economy, which is well integrated in international supply chains, benefited from the upswing in world trade. In contrast, private consumption remained weak and investment declined despite a temporary solar panel investment boom ahead of cuts in subsidies. However, capacity utilisation increased to over 80%, setting the stage for stronger investment in the coming quarters. Both industrial production and new orders continue to grow at a double digit pace and exports are also growing rapidly. Confidence indicators give a more mixed picture, but retail sales have slowly started to recover. The unemployment rate has been gradually decreasing and stood at 6.9% in March 2011. Inflation rose during 2010 mainly due to increases in indirect taxes, regulated prices and commodity prices. Headline inflation stood at 1.6% in April and core inflation remained close to zero. The central bank has maintained the policy interest rate at a historically low level of 0.75%, which is currently a half percentage point below the main ECB rate. The 2010 general government deficit of 4.7% of GDP turned out better than originally budgeted due to lower debt servicing costs and savings in operational costs of the administration. This year, the authorities are pursuing budgetary tightening with an emphasis on expenditure restraint. In particular, cuts in the central-government wage bill are underway. Backed by recently approved medium–term expenditure ceilings, the fiscal deficit is to fall to 3.5% of GDP, and debt is to be held close to 40% of GDP in 2012. With government receipts picking up as a result of renewed growth and additional revenues from a planned VAT increase, these targets are likely to be undershot again. A number of structural reforms are planned for 2012, notably in pensions, healthcare and the tax structure. However, only the tax-structure changes are likely to have a substantial fiscal impact over the projection period. Output is expected to grow by 2.4% in 2011 and pick up speed to 3.5% in 2012. Exports are expected to perform well and investment is projected to recover strongly. In contrast, private consumption will pick up only in 2012, as this year’s fiscal consolidation will have a restraining effect. Inflation will accelerate temporarily in 2012, due to the scheduled hike in the lower VAT rate and ongoing rent deregulation, but underlying inflationary pressures will remain moderate. Notwithstanding a temporary slowdown in the fourth quarter of 2010, the gradual recovery has continued. Boosted by the effects of past strong stimulus, private consumption was the main driver of activity in late 2010 while public consumption started to contract as part of the fiscal consolidation plan. While export growth picked up, Denmark continued to lose market share, reflecting an ongoing deterioration in competitiveness. Private non-residential investment fell further in the second half of 2010. Consumer confidence has recently weakened but remains close to its long-term average. Short-term supply-side indicators point to an expansion of activity and employment in the first quarter of 2011. Employment fell in the fourth quarter of 2010, driven mainly by public-sector fiscal consolidation; employment in the private sector appears to have stabilised. The unemployment rate was unchanged at 7.9% on the harmonised definition in March 2011, though the registered unemployment rate inched down in the first quarter of 2011, to 5.9%. Real wages fell somewhat in both the private and public sectors in 2010 following several years of rapid increases. Past wage inflation partly explains why labour market recovery is slow. OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database. According to lending surveys, financial institutions have eased credit standards for firms and households. While bank lending to households and companies fell in the first quarter of 2011, this may merely reflect weaker demand. House prices have stabilised, the number of housing starts has increased and residential investment has picked up in 2010. The decline in public consumption in late 2010 reflects the successful initiation of the Fiscal Consolidation Agreement adopted in May 2010. In 2010, the general government deficit turned out to be smaller than expected by the government, and just below the 3% of GDP EU threshold. However, this was largely attributable to exceptional revenues from taxes on pension funds returns (which contributed around 1% of GDP). Going forward, the OECD projection assumes that the government will continue to consolidate general government finances in line with the Agreement. Monetary conditions are expected to remain supportive in 2011, before becoming somewhat tighter in 2012. The recovery is expected to regain strength gradually. Public demand is set to contribute less to growth while private demand takes the lead. Exports will benefit from expanding world trade and business investment is projected to gather momentum. Private consumption growth is expected to slow somewhat in 2011 owing to the impact of higher taxes and lower social transfers, before picking up in 2012 on the back of improving labour market conditions. With growth mainly driven by private demand, imports are also projected to grow strongly. Headline inflation will pick up in 2011 on the back of higher commodity prices but core inflation is set to remain subdued as the output gap remains negative at the end of the projection period. The strong export-driven recovery is projected to continue in 2011, reflecting the positive external outlook and improved competitiveness achieved through flexible wage adjustment and restructuring measures. Private consumption will gain momentum in 2012, as unemployment continues to fall, the real wage bill increases, and more bad debt cases are resolved. Despite high headline inflation due to energy and commodity price shocks, no second round effects are projected and core inflation is expected to remain below historical averages. Estonia adopted the euro on 1 January 2011, consolidating past policy achievements. Fiscal policy remains under tight control, and the general government deficit is expected to stay below the 3% of GDP threshold despite the reversal of large one-off measures. Nevertheless, multi-year expenditure ceilings that take into account the cyclical position of the economy should be introduced in order to prevent fiscal policy becoming pro-cyclical in the upswing. The government should intensify its use of active labour market policies to prevent still high unemployment from becoming structural. The economic recovery accelerated in the last two quarters to annualised rates of growth above 8%, the highest in the euro area. Growth was led by a surge in net exports and manufacturing driven by strong external demand and competitiveness gains achieved in the adjustment to the severe recession. Investment bottomed out in mid-2010 and then surged in the fourth quarter, reflecting increasing capacity utilisation in manufacturing. In contrast, deleveraging of households, the relatively high burden of non-performing loans and high unemployment continued to weigh on private consumption, which contracted in the fourth quarter. Construction and consumer confidence indicators remain weak. Employment growth and nominal wage growth resumed in the second half of 2010, as companies restored profitability through earlier restructuring, downsizing and wage cuts. The unemployment rate continued to fall rapidly from 18.6% in the first quarter of 2010 to 14.5% in the fourth quarter. Notwithstanding employment opportunities in Finland, there is still the risk of an increase in structural unemployment due to the depressed outlook for employment in construction. In this context, it will be important to evaluate and, if needed, improve the effectiveness of active labour market policies. Estonia successfully undertook a remarkable consolidation effort to meet the conditions for euro entry, and gross public debt (Maastricht definition) was reduced to 6.6% of GDP in 2010. Fiscal balance was achieved in 2010, due to a combination of continued consolidation measures, stronger economic growth, better outcomes at the local level and substantial one-off operations, including a temporary suspension of contributions to the second pension pillar and sales of CO Exports will lead growth in 2011 and consumption will pick up in 2012 Real GDP is projected to expand strongly. Growth in 2011 will continue to be primarily driven by exports, reflecting the positive external outlook and improved competitiveness. Investment in machinery and equipment should also make a contribution, given increased capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector, restored profitability and overall accommodating monetary conditions of the euro area, despite relatively high risk premia on corporate loans. Growth in 2012 is expected to be broader based, with a recovery in private consumption gaining momentum as unemployment continues to fall, the real wage bill increases, bad debt problems are resolved, and the saving rate falls gradually from its post crisis peak. A strong fiscal position before the recession kept the deficit below 3% of GDP during the crisis. Strong growth and some fiscal consolidation support progress towards budget balance in 2013. Nevertheless, as ageing weighs on public finances, structural reforms to contain public spending and promote labour force participation, together with further reforms of the pension system, remain essential to support medium-term growth and fiscal sustainability. The economy has gathered momentum and is now on a solid growth path, while unemployment has fallen significantly over the year. Exports are leading the recovery, benefitting in particular from strong growth in Germany, Sweden and Russia. Private consumption is supported by income growth, improvements in employment, increasing housing wealth, high household confidence and low interest rates. However, rising oil and commodity prices and hikes in indirect taxes have pushed up headline inflation, eroding households’ purchasing power. Residential investment soared at a rate of over 20% last year, spurred by very low interest rates on mortgages and real house prices that now surpass their pre-crisis level. But the housing boom now seems to be losing momentum. In contrast, business investment, which continued to decline in 2010 as spare capacity remained, is slowly turning around as the economy expands and utilisation rates increase. The series are normalised at the average for the period starting in 1993 and are presented in units of standard deviation. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database, and OECD, Main Economic database. As the European Central Bank has started to move towards normalising interest rates, monetary policy will gradually become less supportive. Households with variable rate mortgages will see their debt burden increase and the user cost of capital for firms will rise, albeit moderately. Fiscal policy, which supported the economy during the downturn, is becoming mildly restrictive. Growth is expected to average above 3% over the projection horizon. Exports, which fell sharply during the recession, will remain the main driver of the recovery. Demand from Finland’s main trading partners is vigorous and competitiveness is improving as the real effective exchange rate has weakened and pay settlements result in moderate wage growth. Consumer confidence is high and the household sector balance sheet is in good shape. Hence private consumption should remain healthy, though it is expected to weaken somewhat as inflation erodes real incomes. Business investment is set to rebound as firms rebuild capacity in a climate of high business confidence and strong export order books. Residential investment, however, will be soft as house price rises slow and interest rates rise. Unemployment will continue to decrease as a result of modest employment growth and continuing contraction in the labour force due to ageing. Once the effects of higher oil and commodity prices and indirect tax hikes dissipate, inflation is projected to fall back below 2% due to a still substantial output gap. Finland is one of the few euro area countries that succeeded in maintaining a fiscal deficit below 3% of GDP through the recent downturn. The fiscal position has started to improve thanks to the recovery in activity and increases in indirect taxes. Based on the previous government’s tax plans and technical spending assumptions, further progress is expected, bringing the deficit to half a per cent of GDP in 2012. Despite this relatively bright picture, further measures will be needed to preserve fiscal sustainability as ageing increasingly weighs on public finances. Structural reforms to raise labour force participation, improve sustainability of the pension system and enhance public sector efficiency would reinforce medium-term growth prospects and the fiscal outlook. The economy is suffering a serious recession in the context of the sizeable, but vital, fiscal retrenchment. A return to sustained positive growth is projected for 2012 as external demand strengthens, competitiveness improves and the far-reaching structural reforms implemented in response to the fiscal crisis start to take hold. Substantial economic slack and rising unemployment will keep inflation pressures subdued. The outlook is subject to important, mostly downside risks. Adherence to the fiscal and structural adjustment programme, agreed in May 2010 with the European Union (EU) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), is indispensible for restoring credibility and market confidence, long-term public debt sustainability and competitiveness. Success depends crucially on rigorous expenditure control and further progress in fighting tax evasion, combined with comprehensive reforms to address chronic rigidities in fiscal management, and in labour and product markets. Output declined by 4.5% in 2010 as domestic demand plunged, but rose in the first quarter of 2011 at an annualised rate of 3½ per cent. Private consumption fell sharply in 2010, due to worsening labour markets, falling incomes and a decline in consumer credit. Investment also continued its downward trend since the beginning of the crisis. Exports, by contrast, increased strongly at the end of last year and in the first quarter of 2011. The unemployment rate had climbed to around 16% at the beginning of 2011. Industrial production, retail trade and consumer credit all suggest weak activity in the months ahead, although new export orders in industry remain a bright spot. Headline inflation reached 4.7% in 2010, reflecting indirect tax increases under the current adjustment programme; excluding tax effects, inflation has been well below the euro area average since the second half of the year. Inflationary pressures eased further in early 2011 as domestic demand weakened further, and the core inflation differential OECD Economic Outlook 89 database and Eurostat. The general government deficit declined by 5 percentage points to 10½ per cent of GDP in 2010, missing slightly the target of 9½ per cent of GDP. Based on outcomes so far, which reflect large expenditure cuts, the 2011 central government deficit appears to be in line with targets . Revenue collection, however, continues to fall below expectations despite a marked improvement in VAT receipts. The OECD projection is for a deficit of 7½ per cent of GDP in 2011 and 6½ per cent of GDP by 2012 – similar to the official targets under the EU/IMF economic programme. The projections take into account the additional measures announced in April 2011 by the government to offset the fiscal slippage in 2010. Public debt is projected to rise to over 150% of GDP by end-2012, even accounting for expected privatisation receipts. Such a high debt level underscores the imperative nature of continued fiscal consolidation and the need for further structural fiscal reforms. Comprehensive structural reforms to dynamise labour and product markets are also indispensible to raise employment and incomes, and to improve debt dynamics. Germany rose to almost 10% points on average in April. In the projections this spread is assumed to remain constant for the remainder of 2011 and then to fall in 2012 as the fiscal and structural programmes bear fruit, raising confidence, or perceptions increase that additional official financing would be forthcoming, if needed. Output is projected to continue declining in 2011 but at a slower pace of around 3%, as the impact of the frontloaded fiscal adjustment on the economy wears off. GDP is projected to rise in 2012, as investment and exports rebound on the back of competitiveness-enhancing structural reforms and strengthening external demand. Faster absorption of the European Union structural funds should also act as a stimulus. Inflation is set to fall over the projection period as the unemployment rate edges up to over 16% in 2012 and substantial economic slack persists. The current account deficit is likely to narrow to around somewhat over 7% of GDP in 2012, reflecting the positive outlook for exports, especially in tourism and shipping, improvements in competiveness and still-weak domestic demand. Dissolving the second pillar of the pension system will lead to a dramatic, but one-off, improvement of the general government balance in 2011, despite a fiscal relaxation induced by tax cuts and spending overruns. The publication of a programme outlining the main goals for structural reforms is a step in the right direction. Implementing credible structural measures to consolidate public finances is the next necessary step to foster market confidence and pave the way to sound growth. Economic activity has slowly gathered pace, but the weakness in final domestic demand has been a drag on activity. Industrial production has been growing vigorously, due to a strong performance of export-oriented enterprises and business confidence indicators suggest that output expansion should strengthen. However, consumer sentiment has weakened since late 2010 and construction activity is depressed. The fiscal position so far in 2011 appears to be weakening. By the end of the first quarter, the cumulated cash budget deficit (excluding local governments) already exceeded the full-year official target of 2.4% of GDP, although temporary taxes levied on specific sectors should mitigate the extent of the deficit. Furthermore, the dismantling of the second pillar of the pension system will provide sizeable one-off revenues of around 9% of GDP and shift the general government balance to surplus on an accruals basis in 2011. However, since part of the second-pillar pension assets will be used to finance current expenditure while pension liabilities have been transferred to the government, long-term fiscal sustainability has deteriorated. The assumption of the debt of public transport companies by the government and the buyout of public-private projects will, also on a one-off basis, lower the surplus this year. Market value of mandatory pension funds at end of year. OECD estimates for 2011 and 2012. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database, Magyar Nemzeti Bank and Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority. Fiscal consolidation is planned… The fiscal balance should swing back to a deficit in 2012 as the one-offs disappear and the switch to a flat-rate personal income tax further reduces revenue. More recently, the authorities have undertaken welcome steps to shore up the fiscal position. A stability fund financed by restraints on current expenditure should reduce the risk of breaching the cash deficit target for 2011. In addition, a programme of structural reforms with expected savings of 2.9% of GDP in 2012 and 2013 has been released, although detailed policy measures and draft legislation have yet to be elaborated. A credible implementation of both steps is critical for improving fiscal sustainability. … which will ease pressure on monetary policy Monetary policy has faced large risk premiums, currency volatility and sovereign rating downgrades. Credible fiscal consolidation would ease such financial market concerns. The policy rate has been raised by 75 basis points to 6%. A large degree of slack is projected to reduce inflation to the central bank’s target of 3%. Growth is projected to pick up to around 3% in 2012, mainly driven by exports and gradually strengthening domestic demand. Fiscal consolidation, tight credit conditions, an ongoing deleveraging of the private sector and increases in households’ precautionary savings will restrain the pace of expansion, though these effects should be offset to some extent by declining risk premiums. After a period of severe adjustment to eliminate imbalances and restructure the banking system, the Icelandic economy is projected to begin to grow again in 2011. The recovery is expected to be led by private investment in large energy-intensive projects and strengthening private consumption expenditure. There is considerable uncertainty about the impact of the rejection of the Icesave Agreement on the normalisation of international financial relations and on the attractiveness of Iceland for investment. Compared with a year earlier, the Icelandic economy stopped shrinking in the fourth quarter of 2010. Private consumption grew, supported by rising disposable incomes, domestic debt relief measures, and the authorisation to withdraw third-pillar pension savings. Residential investment also rose as an improving real estate outlook spurred work on incomplete projects. However, business investment continued to decline, albeit more slowly, owing to the ending of large energy-intensive projects, corporate deleveraging and high levels of spare capacity. Employment continued to fall in the year to the first quarter of 2011, increasing the unemployment rate to 7.5% (seasonally adjusted). Compared with a year earlier, real wage increases in the private sector picked up to 3.5% in the fourth quarter of 2010, eroding earlier falls. The annual inflation rate rose to 2.8% in the year to April owing to a decline in the exchange rate and a rise in commodity prices. The underlying current account balance (which excludes net income payments of credit institutions in winding-up proceedings) remains in small surplus. The general government budget deficit fell by 2.2% of GDP to 7.8% of GDP (6.5% excluding called loan guarantees) in 2010. A larger decline is planned in 2011 and the budget is to be balanced by 2013. Spending restraint accounts for about one half of the consolidation. On the basis of these plans, general government gross debt (including civil service pension liabilities, which amount to around 20% of GDP) should peak at 121% of GDP in 2011; net government debt should peak at 44% of GDP. For the time being, monetary policy continues to be guided by the objective of maintaining currency stability, and the Central Bank of Iceland’s (CBI) policy rates were around 4% in April, below the neutral rate. For the period after the IMF programme ends (August 2011), the CBI favours adopting a revised inflation targeting framework that gives greater weight to exchange rate stability, and coordinated monetary, macro-prudential and fiscal policy. Capital controls are unlikely to be removed by 2012. In preparation for their removal, the CBI recently announced proposals to discourage non-residents from converting their holdings of króna-denominated assets (about 30% of GDP) into foreign exchange. The electorate recently rejected the Icesave Agreement, which would have resolved disputes with the British and Dutch governments and had been expected to add about 2% of GDP to government debt. This dispute is now likely to be settled in court. Credit ratings on Iceland sovereign debt remained unchanged, but the vote and the subsequent legal process could delay the removal of capital controls, reduce investment, and delay Iceland’s EU accession negotiations. Economic recovery should get underway in 2011 A domestic-demand led recovery is projected to get underway during the course of 2011, lifting growth to 3% by 2012. Private consumption expenditure should continue to rise, notably in 2011, and investment in energy-related projects and residential construction should expand this year and next. The unemployment rate is projected to begin to fall in 2011, reaching 5½ per cent by the end of 2012. With the stabilisation of commodity prices and the exchange rate, inflation should ease back to around 2½ per cent by 2012. The main risks to the economic outlook concern the effects of the recent vote against the Icesave agreement and the timing of large energy-intensive investment projects, which could differ significantly from what has been assumed in these projections. Ireland is continuing to undertake a comprehensive and vital adjustment programme to reduce its macroeconomic imbalances and restore its banking system to health. Despite robust export growth, weak domestic demand and ongoing fiscal consolidation have prevented an economic recovery from unfolding so far. As domestic demand stabilises, a modest upturn of output is expected in the course of 2011, with some acceleration in 2012. The unemployment rate is likely to stay high, and core deflation to continue. The fiscal position remains characterised by high deficits, reflecting negative cyclical effects, the collapse of housing-related tax revenues and the large cost of bank recapitalisation. In line with the EU and IMF programme, the general government deficit needs to be reduced to below 3% of GDP by 2015, in order to arrest the accumulation of public debt and restore fiscal sustainability. The government plans to cover the recapitalisation needs of the banking system revealed by the recent stress tests so as to restore normal bank credit flows and support the economic recovery. This should be done as planned without delay. Improving competitiveness through wage restraint and structural reforms should remain a priority. In the three years of recession that began at the end of 2007, GDP has fallen by 14.5%. Output continued to contract sharply in the fourth quarter of 2010 and recent indicators of consumption and construction suggest that weakness in private domestic demand will continue into 2011. The contractionary effects of fiscal consolidation are evident in falls in both public consumption and, particularly, investment. In contrast, a pick-up in global growth and improvement in cost competitiveness have contributed to strong export growth. The official unemployment rate rose to 14.7% towards the end of 2010 and registered unemployment numbers suggest that it remained around this level in early 2011. Employment continues to decline but outward migration flows and falls in the participation rate have contributed to stem the rise in unemployment. Wages in both the public and private sectors fell during 2010. Price deflation is illustrated by the decline of domestic output prices, as measured by the GDP deflator, which has fallen 12% from its peak in mid 2007. Excluding the effects of global commodity price increases consumer prices continued to decline mildly in early 2011. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database and Central Statistics Office Ireland. Exports are projected to continue growing at a rapid pace, supported by robust import demand from trading partners and recent gains in cost-competitiveness. Weighed down by fiscal consolidation, high indebtedness, tax increases and falling real wages, private domestic demand is expected to continue contracting in 2011, albeit at a slower rate. The recovery is set to gather some speed 2012 thanks to a revival of domestic demand. Significant spare capacity, especially in the labour market, will ensure that wages and inflation remain subdued. Export-led as opposed to domestic demand-led growth tends to be relatively job poor and employment is expected to continue shrinking in 2011. Nevertheless, stronger growth should lead to an end to employment declines in 2012, a small fall in the unemployment rate and the beginnings of a self-sustaining recovery. The government has announced a detailed multi-year programme, agreed with the EU and IMF, to reduce the fiscal deficit to below 3% of GDP by 2015. It should fully implement the measures necessary to achieve the programme’s target and, in doing so, seek to minimise the harmful effects of fiscal consolidation on longer-term growth. This projection assumes that discretionary measures of 3.5% of GDP in 2011 and 2% in 2012 are fully implemented. With public interest payments rising fast, this would result in the fiscal deficit declining from 12.1% of GDP in 2010 (excluding bank support measures) to 10.1% in 2011 and 8.2% in 2012. Further measures will be necessary to reach the target of a deficit of 3% of GDP in 2015. The March 2011 bank stress tests were perceived as credible by financial markets as evidenced by a fall in the spread of Irish over German sovereign bond yields. It is important for the return to growth that the recapitalisation and associated restructuring of the banking system occurs without delay. In line with government and EU-IMF programme partner projections, it is assumed that the government will provide, EUR 19 billion (13% of GDP) of the EUR 24 billion in capital needs identified by the stress tests and that the government will receive equivalent assets in return (thus leaving the headline fiscal deficit unchanged). It is possible that some of this transaction will eventually be classified by Eurostat as a capital transfer. If so, these amounts would be added to the headline deficit, but they would have no implications for the consolidation plan to 2015. Either way, combined with the ongoing borrowing needs of the government, this would result in gross public debt measured on a Maastricht basis increasing from 96% of GDP in 2010 to 119% of GDP in 2012. It is assumed that the government will finance the full fiscal deficit and repayment of maturing debt in 2011 and 2012 using funds disbursed under the EU/IMF programme. These funds are sufficient to cover financing needs in both years. On this basis, net government interest payments are projected to increase from 2.4% of GDP in 2010 to 3.9% of GDP in 2012. Germany is assumed to remain constant at its level in April throughout 2011 and then to halve in the course of 2012 as progress in consolidation and economic adjustment leads to a spontaneous increase in confidence or perceptions increase that additional official financing would be forthcoming, if needed. Risks to this projection are balanced. Private consumption may be hit harder than projected by declining household incomes and the weak labour market. In addition, although there have been important forward steps, the banking system has yet to be returned to health, constraining its capability to deliver credit for investment. On the upside, ongoing gains in cost-competiveness may see faster export growth with Ireland gaining market share. Growth in real GDP this year should exceed that of 2010, but rising labour-supply constraints and further interest rate hikes will temper activity in 2012. Annual inflation will remain above the 1-3% target band until the beginning of next year. Growth was very rapid at the end of 2010 Real GDP expanded by 7.7% (seasonally adjusted annualised rate) in the fourth quarter of 2010, bringing growth to 4.7% for the year as a whole. Much of the fourth-quarter strength was due to a rebound in private consumption (8.3% compared with 1% in the previous quarter). Growth in the first quarter of 2011 eased to 4.7%. The room for increases in labour utilisation is diminishing. While labour force participation could rise further, the unemployment rate is already historically low (6.6% in the final quarter of 2010). Bank of Israel; CBS; OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. The authorities are continuing a complex strategy of quelling domestic price pressures through policy-rate increases and specific steps to damp house-price inflation, while also implementing measures to shield the export sector from currency appreciation. Since January the policy rate has been hiked by 100 basis points to 3%. This marks a welcome acceleration in policy normalisation. At the same time, efforts to restrain shekel appreciation continue. The Bank of Israel still makes discretionary purchases of foreign currency, and in January it imposed a 10% reserve requirement on banks’ foreign-exchange derivative contracts with non-residents. Furthermore, a bill removing non-residents’ exemption from a 15% withholding tax on income from short-term bonds has been passed by the Knesset. These efforts to protect the tradeables sector by restraining the exchange rate are increasingly at odds with the pace of economic recovery. Non-diamond goods exports in the second half of 2010 were rather weak; however, monthly data on the dollar value of exports thus far in 2011 indicate a return to rapid growth. If export growth looks set to be strong, then the authorities should return to straightforward single-instrument monetary policy. Strong revenue growth in 2010 combined with adherence to a spending ceiling rule brought a reduction in the general-government deficit from 6.4% of GDP in 2009 to 5.0% in 2010, according to a standardised OECD definition. The broad fiscal strategy for 2011-12 (Israel has adopted a two-year budget system) continues to give priority to income-tax cuts and deficit reduction through a tight lid on spending increases and selective increases in indirect taxation. In early 2011 there was some softening of this strategy. An increase in excise on vehicle fuel was reversed and commitments have been made to reduce increases in water prices, cut public-transport fares and bring forward minimum–wage increases. To offset the fiscal impact of these moves, scheduled cuts in some income-tax rates may be postponed. Growth will peak in 2011 Output is expected to grow by 5.4% in 2011 and by 4.7% in 2012, somewhat above estimated potential rates. The most robust components should be exports and investment. Unemployment should fall below 6% in 2012. Underlying consumer price inflation is projected to edge up, reaching 2.7% by the end of 2012. To stem inflationary pressure the policy rate should be boosted to 4.75% by year-end and a further 75 basis points in 2012. These increases may be smaller if the shekel appreciates further, which in turn partly depends on whether currency intervention continues. The fiscal projection embodies deficit reductions of 1.3 percentage points of GDP in 2011 and 0.8 points in 2012, broadly reflecting government targets. Geopolitical risks have increased After slowing during 2010, growth picked up in early 2011, driven by the acceleration in world trade. Inflation also increased significantly, due in part to higher oil and commodity prices. Output growth is projected to moderate during 2011 and 2012, resulting in annual growth rates of around 4½ per cent and helping to bring inflation back into the central bank’s target range of 2 to 4%. The pace of growth decelerated from 8.6% (seasonally-adjusted annual rate) to 2.0% between the first and final quarters of 2010. However, the economy regained momentum in the first quarter of 2011, with output growth of 5.6%, driven by strong world trade. The effective exchange rate has remained relatively stable over the past year at about 21% below its early 2008 level, boosting Korea’s export competitiveness. Despite the slowdown during 2010, the economy faces capacity constraints, with the unemployment rate falling to around 3½ per cent and the capacity utilisation rate in manufacturing at a historic high. … inflation has become an important concern… Consumer price inflation accelerated from 2.6% (year-on-year) in the second quarter of 2010 to 4.5% in the first quarter of 2011, breaching the upper bound of the central bank’s target zone. Rising food and commodity prices played a role, pushing up producer price inflation to 6.7% in the first quarter. However, core inflation also picked up from 1.6% to 3.0% over the same period. One exception to inflation pressures is a mild decline in housing prices, reflecting the large stock of unsold homes. Korea National Statistical Office, OECD Economic Outlook 89 Database and Bank of Korea. … leading to a tightening of monetary policy Although the Bank of Korea has increased the policy interest rate by 100 basis points from a record-low 2% in July 2010, monetary conditions are still quite relaxed at this stage of the business cycle. Meanwhile, significant fiscal consolidation is under way in line with the National Fiscal Management Plan for 2010-14. Growth in nominal central government spending is to be limited to around 5% per year, helping to reduce the consolidated central government deficit (excluding the social security surplus) from 4.1% of GDP in 2009 to 1.1% in 2012, despite cuts in personal and corporate income tax rates. The expansion is projected to remain on track… Despite some drag from tightening monetary and fiscal policy, the expansion is projected to remain on track, with annual output growth rates of around 4½ per cent in 2011 and 2012. The household sector, which had debt amounting to 124% of household income in 2010, will be negatively impacted by higher borrowing costs, as well as the terms-of-trade loss from increased oil and commodity prices, limiting the growth of private consumption. The 11 March disaster in Japan, which supplies about a quarter of Korea’s imports of parts and capital equipment, is currently expected to reduce exports only temporarily. A return to double-digit gains in exports, which account for one-half of GDP, will be an important source of growth through 2012. Business and consumer confidence remains high, despite some decline in recent months. Slowing output growth should help bring headline inflation back into the central bank’s target zone from the second half of 2011, while the unemployment rate stabilises at around 3½ per cent. The current account surplus in projected to recede from 2.8% of GDP in 2010 to less than 2% in 2011-12, reflecting the impact of higher oil prices. … depending on developments in the world economy The major risks for Korea, the world’s eighth-largest exporter, are mainly tied to the strength of the recovery in world trade and the exchange rate. The outlook is particularly sensitive to demand from China, which accounts for one-third of Korean exports. In addition, there is a risk that the impact of disruptions to the supply chain related to imports from Japan following the March earthquake may be larger or more prolonged than expected. On the domestic side, rising interest rates may restrain private consumption more than foreseen, in so far as heavily-indebted households use income gains to repay their loans, which are mostly at floating interest rates. Strong exports and a robust expansion of domestic demand are driving the continuing recovery. Consumption and investment are anticipated to continue to pick up during 2011, while financial and business services exports will remain strong. Although growth is likely to be higher than in neighbouring countries, uncertainties remain around the post-crisis development of the key financial sector. The recovery is continuing with GDP rising by 4.6% in the year to the fourth quarter of 2010. Export growth was strong as the result of recovery in financial market activity and demand for industrial goods. Domestic demand expanded at a robust pace, reflecting improvements in confidence, employment gains and low interest rates. The running down of inventories, which dragged down growth during 2010, is likely to have been largely completed. OECD, OECD Economic Outlook, No. 89 database and Statec. The general government balance has deteriorated from a deficit of 0.9% of GDP in 2009 to an estimated 1.7% in 2010. The budget for 2011 aims to bring the deficit to 1% of GDP. In addition to the cyclical recovery, the plan includes restraint on expenditures, notably public investment, as well as tax increases, including a hike in the top income tax rate. Some further measures may be needed to meet the objective of balancing the budget by 2014. More ambitious consolidation and major reforms to the pension system are needed to be meet the challenge from large future pension costs,. Implementation of a comprehensive and far-reaching pension reform is needed to achieve sustainability. The Mexican economy has embarked on a strong recovery from the recession of 2008-09. Initially driven by exports, activity is expected to be increasingly supported by domestic demand. After a strong rise in 2010 to 5½ per cent, GDP growth will ease in 2011 (4½ per cent) and 2012 (3.8%), as the expansion of exports will normalise. The government started fiscal consolidation in 2010 with tax increases and a partial withdrawal of stimulus measures. The projection assumes that the government will implement its plans to return to a balanced budget, based on the national definition of the deficit, by 2012. Oil production has stabilised for now, but the government should reduce its dependence on this volatile source of revenue by implementing further tax reform and withdrawing energy subsidies more quickly. Meanwhile, the central bank can wait to raise interest rates, as slack in production capacity remains large, core inflation has fallen throughout 2010 and inflation expectations remain well anchored. Thus recent food price increases are not expected to lead to important second round effects. The recovery was initially led by a strong rebound in exports, as world trade and industrial production in the United States, Mexico’s main trading partner, recovered. Improving business confidence and normalised financial conditions have boosted private investment, while strong employment growth and recovering confidence are supporting private consumption. Thus, activity is increasingly supported by domestic demand, while trade growth has normalised. The trade and current account deficits remain moderate. Employment is now well above pre-crisis levels, although with Mexicans returning to the labour force employment growth has not been strong enough to bring down unemployment significantly. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; Bank of Mexico; INEGI. Core inflation declined throughout 2010, while headline inflation has been a bit more volatile, reflecting rises in food prices and some administered prices, including energy. Since its post-crisis low of March 2009, the peso has appreciated, restraining price increases. Fiscal consolidation began in 2010 with tax increases and expenditure cuts to compensate for decreased revenues due to declining oil production, which has now stabilised, although at a lower level than previously. The projection assumes that the government will implement some further expenditure restraint in 2011 and 2012, as foreseen in the budget. The public sector borrowing requirement is expected to fall from 5½ per cent in 2009 to 2½ per cent in 2012. This would translate into a closing of the combined deficit of the central government and its public enterprises, on the national definition. This excludes PEMEX’s investment spending, but – unlike in the standard national accounts definition – includes a number of pure financing operations. This deficit reduction is needed to maintain the sustainability of Mexico’s public finances. In the longer term, the government should aim for more independence from oil-related tax revenues, for example through broadening the tax base and removing energy subsidies faster than currently planned. Any extra revenues from higher than expected oil prices should be saved in the oil stabilisation fund. The central bank has left the policy rate at 4.5% since July 2009, which is well below its neutral level. Supportive financial conditions have thus contributed to the recovery of domestic demand, as have stronger employment growth and increasing remittances sent by Mexican workers abroad. Mexico can afford to keep policy rates low for some time in view of declining inflation, still considerable unused capacities and moderate wage increases. Medium-term inflation expectations are reasonably well-anchored according to the central bank’s survey, with experts expecting inflation to remain within the upper half of the central bank’s target range. The recovery is expected to continue with increasing support from domestic demand. However, strong internal demand will not fully compensate for the normalisation of export growth, which is tapering off after an exceptionally strong rebound. Growth is thus expected to ease throughout the projection period, from 5½ per cent in 2010 to 4½ per cent in 2011 and a bit below 4% in 2012. Employment is expected to continue its recovery, driving unemployment down to pre-crisis levels in 2012. The current account balance is projected to widen mildly, as imports strengthen along with domestic demand. The recent uptick in headline inflation owing to food price increases is not expected to lead to second-round effects given the still large unused production capacity and continuing slack in labour markets. Both headline and core inflation are expected to remain within the target range in 2012. Higher-than-expected food price inflation could weigh on consumers’ real incomes. If second-round effects appeared, the result could be lower growth combined with higher inflation. In contrast, a stronger US recovery would strengthen Mexico’s exports. The minority government is pursuing a path towards fiscal sustainability by implementing a medium-term consolidation plan of over 3% of GDP, of which 1 percentage point is to occur in 2011-12. As the labour market tightens, the combination of a low unemployment rate and high vacancy rates points to a need for a better allocation of labour, which would benefit from measures to increase housing market flexibility and reduce congestion. Strong world trade has spurred export growth leading to a recovery in production and supporting a revival in business investment, which is likely to accelerate given the low base level and buoyant orders. Restocking is also making a positive, though less persistent, contribution. On the other hand, public demand, strong throughout the crisis, is now being curtailed by consolidation. Household consumption is picking up only slowly due to slow real household disposable income growth. Consumer confidence, on an upward trend since two years, remains below pre-crisis levels. Headline inflation kept rising in early 2011, on the back of energy and food price hikes, while core inflation dropped to below 1½ per cent in early 2011, reflecting slow wage growth. Unemployment has been falling slowly since mid-2010, but remains above 4% as widespread labour hoarding during the downturn has slowed hiring. The increase in employment throughout 2010 was accompanied by a pick-up in vacancies, particularly in the private sector. However, employment has not been increasing fast enough to prevent slowing wage growth, as visible in wage settlements. At below 5½ per cent of GDP, the 2010 budget deficit was almost 1 percentage point lower than initially planned, mainly due to cyclical developments. Fiscal consolidation, already underway, is set to exceed 1% of GDP over the projection period and be slightly back-loaded. The budget deficit should be below 4% in 2011 and just above 2% the following year. Most measures are on the spending side, particularly in public administration costs, subsidies and social transfers. Small additional budget improvements are to come from the expiration of fiscal stimulus measures and higher natural gas revenues. Over the projection period the recovery will depend increasingly on private domestic demand, but will be held back by fiscal and monetary tightening. GDP should return to pre-crisis levels at the turn of 2011. A pick-up in business investment from a low level is projected, reflecting tightening capacity constraints and buoyant orders, though its effect on growth will be contained by the high import content of investment. Private consumption is likely to remain in check due to the slow wage growth and the effects of contractionary policies. Employment should continue to rise, leading a gradual fall in the unemployment rate to below 4% by the end of 2012, but a rapid pick-up in wages is not expected. As a consequence, inflation (both headline and core) should stabilise at below 2%. A spike in headline inflation is expected mid-2011 due to the periodic adjustment of Dutch energy contracts. NEW ZEALAND A devastating second earthquake has derailed a recovery already weakened by exchange-rate appreciation and private-sector efforts to reduce high levels of mortgage debt. Reconstruction and other one-offs will set the stage for a strong rebound in the second half of this year and into 2012. Growth had slackened… The recovery lost momentum in the second half of 2010. The recovery in global risk appetite led to renewed NZD appreciation, and tradables sectors consequently underperformed. Lingering uncertainty and a high cost of capital, notwithstanding lower interest rates, left business investment at historically low levels, with little new hiring as well. Efforts by households and farms to reduce debt in the wake of property price declines, persisting high unemployment and an early summer drought implied little household spending growth, despite record dairy prices and terms-of-trade gains. The housing market slowed in reaction to monetary tightening and tax changes on property investment. … when a devastating new earthquake hit In February 2011, just as indicators were improving and reconstruction from the September earthquake was imminent, a second and far deadlier earthquake struck Christchurch. Besides significant loss of life, injury and disruption to activity, the financial cost of the damage to homes, business structures and local infrastructure from the two earthquakes combined is estimated at 8% of national GDP, equivalent to around 2.5% of the national capital stock. Households bore around two-thirds of the property losses, nearly all being covered by a mix of public and private insurance. The government’s Earthquake Commission will fund the public insurance payouts (at some 3½ per cent of GDP) by means of both own asset drawdowns and international reinsurance. New Zealand Statistics New Zealand and OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Monetary policy has been eased… Headline inflation is picking up strongly on the back of domestic consumption tax increases and global commodity price inflation, as well as higher insurance premia consequent to the earthquake. However, underlying inflation remains subdued, given the weakness of demand. In March, the Reserve Bank reduced its policy rate by 50 basis points to 2.5% as … as has fiscal policy The earthquakes’ medium-term fiscal costs are estimated at 6% of GDP, over two-thirds of which represents higher spending and the remainder lost tax revenues due to weaker economic activity. The major spending items are the public earthquake insurance payments to households and repair of local infrastructure, each estimated at 1.5% of GDP. Exceptional public expenses will also arise for health care, disability, employment income losses, temporary lodging and other assistance programmes. The general government deficit is projected to reach 8½ per cent of GDP in 2011, when many of these costs are incurred. Despite this, the government has signalled that it plans to meet its medium-term consolidation objectives by imposing a freeze on overall nominal discretionary spending in the May budget; that is, spending increases in some areas will be offset by reductions elsewhere. The projections assume spending restraint apart from earthquake expenses. Growth in the first quarter of 2011 is expected to be significantly negative. Though aftershocks are continuing, the second quarter may benefit from a technical rebound. The Rugby World Cup, expected to provide a growth boost of ¼–½ percentage point in the September-October period, and the early stages of earthquake reconstruction imply a step-up in growth around mid-year. Rebuilding is projected to get more fully underway in 2012 and continue to add to demand for several years. Record-high commodity prices will also provide support. Private investment and consumption should start to recover more surely, though needed fiscal consolidation will start to bite and private debt reduction will probably be sustained. Norway has fully recovered from the global economic crisis. Growth is projected to rise through 2012 on the back of increasing private consumption and investment, despite stagnating oil and gas exports. Inflation has remained low so far, partly due to moderate wage rises, but the acceleration of output and increasing pressures on production capacity will lift it somewhat through the projection period. Norway’s mainland economy (excluding oil-related activity) has resumed a solid pace of output growth in recent quarters, and the latest indicators suggest continued strengthening. On the domestic side, consumer confidence and investment expectations have returned to their very high pre-crisis levels. Credit demand and housing investment have been rising, with house prices reaching record levels. On the external side, rising oil prices have boosted public revenues and petroleum-sector investment. Recent figures on unemployment indicate the beginning of a recovery in the labour market. Despite the strength of the economy, wage increases were moderate in 2010. This and the appreciation of the krone relative to the currencies of Norway’s major trading partners have contributed to consumer price inflation remaining low so far. On a scale from –5 (sharp fall) to +5 (strong growth). level of around 4% by the end of 2012. The present projections are similar to those of Norges Bank, and hence incorporate a similar path for interest rates. They also assume that the fiscal plans for 2011 as set out in the National Budget from October 2010 will be fully implemented, keeping taxes at the same level over the next two years and allowing for a modest increase in the non-oil budget deficit from 2010 to 2011. Private consumption and investment will drive GDP growth… Economic growth is projected to rise through the projection period on the back of strong increases in private consumption and private investment, notably in the oil and construction industries. The mainland economy is estimated to expand by 3.3% in 2011 and 4% in 2012. Higher domestic demand will exert favourable effects on the labour market, and will slowly push up wage growth. This will contribute to a gradual increase in consumer price inflation. Partly as a result of high immigration, the unemployment rate will only decline slowly however. … while public consumption and net exports will exert damping effects In line with the fiscal plans of the government, increases in public consumption are assumed to slow over the projection period. Strong growth in the GPFG, the repository of net petroleum revenues, should bring the structural non-oil budget deficit down to or below 4% of assets in the GPFG in 2011. The continuing increase in world trade will lead to a modest rise in non-petroleum export growth over the projection period. Nonetheless, owing to high consumer confidence as well as the continued strength of the krone, imports are expected to outpace exports, leading to a moderate reduction of the current account surplus. The Polish economy is projected to expand by close to 4% in 2011 and 2012 thanks to strong public investment in 2011, partly related to EU-financed infrastructure projects and the 2012 football championships, a recovery in business investment in 2012 and robust private consumption. The budget deficit is projected to decrease from 7.9% of GDP in 2010 to 5.8% in 2011 and 3.7% in 2012. Inflation jumped in early 2011 due to booming food and energy prices. Monetary tightening should be continued towards a neutral stance both to tame inflation expectations and forestall second-round effects from the commodity price increases, and also because strong growth will soon result in pressure on productive capacity. Economic growth reached a robust 3.8% in 2010 on the back of public and private consumption and a turnaround in stockbuilding, even though private consumption decelerated somewhat late in the year. But industrial production has accelerated, and business confidence indicators suggest continued expansion. Fixed investment fell, especially in machinery and equipment and residential construction, but inward direct investment accounted for 2% of GDP and may reach 4% of GDP in 2011. Growth in non-residential construction is still subdued. Credit to the domestic economy seems to be recovering only slowly. The standardised unemployment rate has stabilised at about 9.5% since early 2010. A number of measures will reduce the fiscal deficit in 2011 and 2012 Despite robust growth, the budget deficit rose to 7.9% of GDP in 2010, a percentage point higher than foreseen in Poland’s EU convergence programme. It is projected to fall to 5.8% in 2011 and 3.7% in 2012, in part due to strong economic growth. Also, the decision to divert, as of May 2011, some social security contributions from the mandatory second pension pillar (which is outside the government sector) to the first pillar (which is in the government sector) will reduce the deficit by around 0.6% of GDP in 2011 and 1.1% in 2012. Other consolidation measures include an increase in VAT and the introduction of spending norms in central government. Public investment spending is projected to slow in 2012, as infrastructure projects come to a halt. NBP; OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database. Additional efforts are needed to reach the government’s 2012 budget target The budget deficit is projected to decrease to 3.7% of GDP in 2012 as the diversion of social security contributions takes full effect. Thus, further measures are needed if the government is to achieve its deficit goal of 2.9% of GDP in 2012. The government’s proposal to introduce deficit and debt limits for local authorities would be a step in the right direction. Further spending reductions could be achieved by reforming the first pension pillar to eliminate privileges of uniformed services and judges and increase the effective retirement age, by enhancing efficiency in public administration, education and healthcare, and by improving the targeting of selected social spending. There is also room to cut tax expenditures and increase green and property taxes. Public debt will remain below 60% of GDP in 2012 The government seeks to maintain public debt (national definition) below the intermediate threshold of 55% of GDP in 2011 and 2012 by relying on a number of measures in addition to reducing the deficit:   ) decreasing interest payments on public debt by borrowing from cheaper sources, such as the European Investment Bank, to finance large infrastructure projects; ) privatising mostly minority stakes in state-owned companies (around 1% of GDP in 2011); ) transferring assets managed by the demographic reserve fund to the budget; ) improving the public sector’s liquidity management; and ) transferring central bank profits to the budget (worth 0.4% of GDP in 2011). Headline inflation rose sharply in early 2011, chiefly because of food and energy price increases. These may translate into wage increases, especially as inflation expectations have already edged up, economic slack is rapidly diminishing and minimum wages will rise by 8% in 2012. This calls for monetary tightening. Growth is expected to remain strong, initially on the back of fixed investment fuelled by EU funds and related to the preparations for the 2012 football championship, a revival of business investment in 2012, and robust private consumption. Unemployment is projected to decline gradually and the current account to worsen due to strong import growth. There is a risk that if structural fiscal tightening measures are not undertaken, given the context of parliamentary elections in late 2011, the general government deficit will be higher than projected, which could jeopardise macroeconomic stability. Any delay in monetary tightening would result in stronger domestic demand and higher inflation. The economy is expected to continue contracting in 2011 and most of 2012, as fiscal consolidation and deleveraging gather pace. Persistent domestic demand weakness will lead to lower inflation once the effects of more expensive oil and hikes in indirect taxes have dissipated. Exports should remain dynamic, underpinning the end of output losses towards the end of 2012 and a gradual reduction of the current account deficit. Unemployment is set to rise further. Real GDP fell in the fourth quarter of 2010, amid private demand weakness and plummeting confidence. Household consumption was nonetheless cushioned by booming purchases of durable goods, in anticipation of the 2011 increase in VAT. With this effect being reversed, consumption has weakened significantly, resulting in a further contraction of output in early 2011. Against this background, the recent acceleration in core inflation has largely reflected increases in the VAT and in regulated prices, and the rise in global oil prices has further fuelled headline inflation. Labour market conditions have remained depressed. Despite strong export growth, the current account deficit narrowed only marginally in 2010, as imports were boosted by the temporary consumption boom and sizeable military equipment purchases. Based on index 2005=100, seasonally and working-day adjusted. Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE), Associação Automóvel de Portugal (ACAP) and OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. After two months of mounting pressure from financial markets, with yields and spreads soaring, the current caretaker government decided in April to request external financial assistance from the European Union and the IMF. Tensions were exacerbated by the government’s resignation (announced in late March) in the wake of the parliamentary rejection of a new austerity package. The political crisis triggered a wave of credit rating downgrades for the state and enterprises. Banks continue to have virtually no access to wholesale debt markets and are therefore heavily dependent on ECB financing, amounting to e48 billion in April 2011. Credit growth has slowed, and consumer credit outstanding has even fallen slightly. This trend will likely be aggravated as banks shrink their balance sheets. The 2010 budget deficit fell to 9.2% of GDP (national accounts definition), against 10.1% in 2009, with the reduction essentially achieved in the fourth quarter. Several one-offs and exceptional events – mainly receipts from a pension fund, outlays due to banking losses, major military equipment purchases and the reclassification of three public-private partnership projects as part of public investment – partly cancelled each other out, with an overall negative impact on the deficit of around 0.6% of GDP. For 2011, the OECD projections incorporate the consolidation measures legislated in the 2011 Budget, as well as additional restraint in a number of areas, such as subsidies and public investment, as claimed by the authorities. For 2012, the measures envisaged under the EU/IMF financial assistance programme are taken on board. The 10-year government bond yield differential Germany is projected to remain at its average level in April (5.8 percentage points) for the remainder of 2011 and then to halve in 2012 as progress in consolidation and economic adjustment leads to a spontaneous increase in confidence or perceptions increase that additional official financing would be forthcoming, if needed. Further, it is assumed that only a minor part of the government financing needs in 2011 and 2012 will be funded in the markets. Strictly implementing the fiscal and structural policy reforms foreseen in the financial assistance programme is essential both to ensure fiscal sustainability and to enhance the growth potential of the economy. GDP is set to contract until late 2012, with annual decreases of 2.1% in 2011 and 1.5% in 2012. All components of domestic demand are expected to fall, though export growth is projected to remain strong as the global economy continues to recover. The unemployment rate is expected to rise further. With subdued demand and growing spare capacity, inflation should decrease markedly once the impact of rising oil prices and indirect taxation vanishes. The current account is projected to improve significantly, though the gain from trade volumes is partly undone by trade prices (especially in 2011, largely due to more expensive oil) and a worsening income balance. The economy rebounded strongly in 2010, and is expected to continue to do so in 2011, driven by strong external demand and business investment. Household consumption, however, will be damped by fiscal consolidation and persistent high unemployment. Growth should be more balanced in 2012, not least due to more favourable labour market developments. The fiscal deficit is projected to fall to around 4% of GDP in 2012 owing to planned consolidation measures. Efforts will be appropriately concentrated on the expenditure side. Recently announced reforms of the pension system, in particular the introduction of stabilisation mechanisms in the first pillar, are welcome as they will reduce future increases in ageing-related spending. Economic activity has recovered strongly… Economic growth in 2010 was the fastest among euro area countries and real GDP has returned to its pre-crisis level. This mostly reflects buoyant world trade, in particular strong growth in Germany. Business investment also rebounded, reflecting an improvement in business climate and an increase in capacity utilisation, which is converging to its long-term average. By contrast, household consumption growth remained subdued on the back of continued weakness in employment growth and public expenditures began to decline in the last quarter of 2010, reflecting the start of consolidation measures. … but is expected to slow down in the short run Recent indicators suggest that the recovery will continue, but at a slower pace over the coming months. Business confidence in the main trading partners has recently weakened, suggesting that external demand will slow somewhat. In addition, consumer confidence has continued to worsen and retail sales have increased only slightly. Employment remained weak and inflation rose significantly mainly due to increases in food and energy prices and a hike in VAT and excise duties. This has weighed on households’ purchasing power. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; OECD, Main Economic Indicators database. The main feature of the projection is the weakness in private consumption in 2011, which reflects fiscal consolidation measures and a slow recovery of employment. The government plans ambitious cuts in the budget deficit in 2011 and 2012 to reach its target of 2.9% of GDP in 2013. In 2011, the consolidation package should amount to around 2.5% of GDP, 60% coming from public expenditure cuts, which will weaken domestic demand. In particular, the planned 10% cut in public wage costs, to be achieved both through layoffs and cuts in remuneration, already has had a negative impact on the labour market. Unemployment rose somewhat further at the beginning of the year, suggesting that layoffs in the public sector exceeded employment gains in the private sector. Together with the increase in hours worked per employee, this will damp the overall employment response during the recovery. As a result, unemployment is expected to decline only slowly in 2011 overall and is likely to induce a certain level of wage moderation and a stagnation in real household disposal income. Annual GDP growth is projected to slow from 4% in 2010 to 3.6% in 2011. Growth will continue to be mainly driven by exports, as foreign demand is expected to remain strong. In addition, low increases in worker compensation will maintain cost competitiveness of exporting firms. While the partial cancellation of public-private-partnership projects for motorway construction may lower public investment expenditure, announced private investments, in particular in the automotive sector, should boost gross capital formation. Favourable monetary conditions will also sustain investment growth. In 2012, growth is expected to bounce back and reach 4.4% as less fiscal tightening is budgeted and a more progressive employment recovery will trigger a rebound in domestic consumption. While headline inflation will be pushed up in the short run by increases in commodity prices, underlying inflationary pressures are expected to be limited as the output gap remains negative. The recovery continues to be mainly supported by external demand and restocking. Growth should gradually strengthen as private investment and consumption gain momentum. The unemployment rate is projected to peak by mid-2011 as activity picks up. Inflationary pressures stemming from a surge in global food and energy prices should peter out, and persistent economic slack will contain underlying inflation pressures. The 2010 budgetary outturn was in line with the envisaged consolidation path. The pension reform, which has been adopted by parliament but is now being challenged in a referendum to be held in June 2011, is a critical step in ensuring long-term fiscal sustainability. Reforms to enhance labour market flexibility and to align wage growth with labour productivity over the medium-term should be undertaken to foster competitiveness. The recovery in activity has resumed but final domestic demand has remained depressed. Short-term indicators paint a mixed picture, with marginally improving business confidence in manufacturing, retail trade, and services, and still very weak consumer confidence and business confidence in construction. The capacity utilisation rate in manufacturing reached its highest level since the onset of the economic downturn, but substantial slack remains. Headline inflation fell in the second half of 2010 owing to declines in the prices of some subsidised services, but picked up with the acceleration of world food and energy prices in early 2011. Core prices have been falling since the second half of 2010, reflecting the slack in the economy. The unemployment rate has reached its highest level since end-2005. In part, this reflects limited wage adjustment, largely due to the sizeable 2010 minimum wage hike. Employment ticked up somewhat in late 2010, however, as public employment in education and health rose. An act to regulate student work and further increase the flexibility of temporary contracts, commonly referred to as the Mini Jobs Act, was voted down decisively in a referendum in April 2011, raising concerns over the viability of additional structural policy initiatives to raise employment. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. The government has embarked on fiscal consolidation to reduce the budget deficit to below 3% of GDP by 2013, primarily through containing the public-sector wage bill and transfers, and cutting capital spending. The plan to reduce public employment by 1% a year through 2013 should be strictly implemented, notwithstanding slippage in 2010. However, a number of factors may jeopardise the fiscal consolidation. The 2010 pension reform will be voted on in a referendum set for 5 June 2011 amid a politically challenging environment. If it is rejected, long-term fiscal sustainability will be undermined and the macroeconomic outlook could deteriorate considerably, given current volatility in international financial markets. The recapitalisation of systemic banks is already underway and will contribute significantly to the 2011 budget deficit. Further capital injections could exert additional pressure on public finances. While banks have to adapt to new regulatory requirements, credit flows to the business sector have been reduced. To encourage credit activity, the authorities plan to introduce a tax applying to banks with a relatively low exposure to the business sector. However, such a measure interferes with the risk management of banks, which is a particular concern at a time when banks need to repair their balance sheets and the corporate sector is overleveraged. The recovery is projected to pick up gradually over the next two years. Growth will depend on domestic demand progressively gathering pace as the unemployment rate declines, if modestly, from the second half of 2011 and as the business environment improves in 2012. Exports are projected to be sustained as the global recovery continues. As economic slack is set to linger, inflation is projected to moderate to close to 2% in 2012. Economic growth is projected to strengthen gradually, reaching 1% in 2011 and 1½ per cent in 2012, as the damping impact of downsizing in residential construction diminishes and the international environment improves. As growth picks up, the unemployment rate will fall slowly to around 19% by end-2012. Consumer price inflation will tend to fall, once the effect of rising energy and food prices and the increase in the VAT rates drop out. The fiscal deficit is projected to decline from 9.2% of GDP in 2010 to 6.3% in 2011 and to 4.4% in 2012, mostly reflecting measures to lower spending. Some planned spending reductions in 2012 still need to be specified and the government should stand ready to introduce further measures if needed. To boost job creation, legal requirements on firms to apply collective bargaining outcomes negotiated at sectoral levels should be eased. The cost of dismissing workers on permanent contracts should be reduced further, moving closer to a unified contract. Real GDP grew by 0.3% in the first quarter of 2011 as exports expanded strongly, boosted by recovery in the euro area as well as booming sales to South America and other emerging economies. Industrial production strengthened and strong tourism receipts have raised services revenues. External demand has boosted business equipment investment. Household consumption growth slowed as real disposable incomes were hit by rising oil prices, which pushed consumer price inflation to 3.5% in April. Employment losses continued while the unemployment rate steadied at above 20%. House prices have fallen by around 20% from their peak in real terms and continued to fall in the first quarter of 2011, in part owing to the withdrawal of tax subsidies for owner-occupiers at the end of 2010. While the downsizing of residential construction is well-advanced, activity is set to remain depressed for some time, given the overhang of unsold dwellings. Finished housing approved by the Surveyors College. Excludes housing promoted by co-operatives, physical persons and owners’ communities. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database, Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Banco de España and Ministerio de Fomento. Higher VAT rates, introduced in 2010 and higher tobacco and fuel taxes are expected to boost tax revenues by ½ per cent of GDP in 2011. Regional and local governments also raised personal income and real estate tax rates. Spending cuts are projected to amount to about 2½ per cent of GDP in 2011. Spending restraint measures include continued cutbacks in public investment, as well as in public sector pay and employment at all levels of government and the removal of child benefits. Most pension payments are frozen in nominal terms. In 2012 cuts in public sector employment will continue and the central government has announced further reductions of consumption and transfer spending, although these have yet to be specified. Finally, the government has announced it will lower public investment spending, which remains high in international comparison, by as much as necessary to reach its target. The projections assume that the deficit target of 4.4% of GDP will be reached. Up to April 2011 risk spreads on government debt stabilised at levels below the peaks reached in 2010, notwithstanding continued turmoil in euro area government debt markets. The authorities have taken several measures to reduce investors’ risk perceptions. Banks have been required to publish detailed information on real estate exposures. Capital requirements have been raised. Savings banks, which have undergone restructuring but face substantial exposure to the housing developers, will need injections worth 1.4% of GDP, partly from the government, to meet these new requirements. Exposure of Spanish financial intermediaries to Portuguese debtors is concentrated on the non-financial private sector, which is less affected by the debt crisis. A reform of the public pension system expected to be approved by parliament will damp the expected long-term increase in pension spending and improve work incentives. Higher short-term interest rates will raise households’ debt servicing costs with a lag of about one year. GDP growth is expected to strengthen only gradually, driven by external demand and modest expansion of private consumption. Collective bargaining outcomes indicate that wage growth will be low in 2011, strengthening competitiveness, helping to narrow the current account deficit further. The unemployment rate is expected to fall to around 19% by the end of 2012. Real GDP continued to grow strongly in the fourth quarter of 2010, exceeding its pre-recession peak. The recovery is broad-based, with private consumption and investment both contributing significantly. Business investment is benefiting from higher bank lending and increasing capacity utilisation. Housing investment, which has been supported by a tax credit for repairs, renovation and improvements and by hitherto low interest rates, continues to grow, albeit more moderately as interest rates begin to rise. Industrial production is growing very strongly and consumer and business confidence are high. The Riksbank, OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Core inflation is expected to remain moderate, owing to some residual spare capacity. Headline inflation (which includes mortgage interest rate costs) is expected to be around the official target of 2%, which is a bit higher than core inflation reflecting increases in interest rates. However, with some signs that inflation expectations may be rising and with wage pressures likely to pick up if labour force participation increases less than expected, the central bank needs to remain vigilant. Indeed, it intends to continue the hikes in the policy interest rate which began in July 2010. The fiscal stance is set to tighten, starting in 2012. The economic expansion and the government’s fiscal framework will help move the budget back into surplus from 2011. The recovery is expected to continue, though its pace will ease as stimulus is withdrawn, before regaining some momentum into 2012. Declining unemployment, low (though rising) interest rates and high levels of confidence should support consumer spending. Exports, although expected to be hurt somewhat by the appreciation of the krona in 2010, will pick up during 2012 as export markets strengthen. This, together with a moderation in import growth as domestic demand eases, will help to stabilise the current account surplus and lead to a slight pick-up in GDP growth. The recovery in investment will continue, though it will be moderated somewhat by rising interest rates. Economic growth is expected to remain firm in 2011 and 2012, driven by strong domestic demand. Growth will slow toward the end of 2012, progressively returning to its potential rate, as the output gap closes. Unemployment is projected to decline further while inflation will rise to slightly above 1% in 2012. Monetary policy rates will have to rise gradually from 2011 onwards to damp inflationary pressures from domestic demand growth but, most importantly, to avoid overheating in the housing market. Implementing the recent government plans to address the too-big-to-fail problem would reduce the risks stemming from a potential failure of the two big banks. Real GDP growth continued to be robust in the first half of 2011, mainly driven by strong domestic demand, linked to low short and long-term interest rates which have been stimulating marked growth of bank lending, especially mortgages. Labour market performance remains favourable, further stimulating consumption growth. Despite the strong recovery, consumer price inflation remains low in international comparison, reflecting in part the damping effect due to the exchange rate appreciation, although some measures of core inflation suggest an increase in underlying inflation. Although the Swiss franc has appreciated to a record high, export growth remained positive until the first quarter of 2011. Forward looking business confidence indicators suggest ongoing robust GDP growth for the coming months. Employment growth should also remain positive as suggested by steadily increasing job vacancies. January 1999 = 100. KOF institute; OECD, Economic Outlook 89 database; SNB. As a result of a set of recently introduced fiscal policy measures, fiscal policy will be slightly restrictive in 2011 and 2012. Planned consolidation measures, which are assumed to be implemented, will amount to less than 0.3% of GDP, while somewhat higher unemployment insurance contributions and a modest increase of value added tax rates will help reduce the deficits in the unemployment and invalidity insurance. Real GDP growth is projected to accelerate slightly to 2.7% in 2011 as relatively low interest rates continue to stimulate domestic demand. It will slow somewhat in 2012 as macroeconomic policy stimulus is withdrawn. The unemployment rate will continue to decline gradually, stimulating further domestic consumption. Both the policy rate and the inflation rate are forecast to rise gradually reaching 1.2% and 1.1% in 2012, respectively. The general government budget surplus is projected to increase slightly over the projection period. After approaching 9% in 2010, growth is projected to slow to 6.5% in 2011 and 5.3% in 2012, as credit conditions, broadly defined, become tighter. The current account deficit is projected to rise further, to 8.9% of GDP by 2012. Growth reached 8.9% in 2010, far exceeding most projections, including those that underpinned last year’s budget. Private investment and consumption were the key drivers. Government demand remained subdued and exports proved weak. With private domestic demand driving the recovery, and against the backdrop of significant real exchange rate appreciation, imports accelerated. Strong business and consumer confidence, as well as rising industrial production and capital good imports, point to continued buoyancy in 2011. CPI inflation fell from 9.6% in the first quarter of 2010 to just under 4% in March 2011 – a historical low which resulted from favourable base effects and service price moderation. Headline inflation is heavily affected by volatile food prices, which have been subdued recently but are expected to increase. Higher food prices, together with higher prices for other commodities, are expected to put upward pressure on inflation in the rest of the year. Core inflation fell through most of 2010 but has moved back up since November. Producer prices are running ahead of consumer prices. However, economic slack persists, with capacity utilisation at below pre-crisis levels (due to very strong investment growth) and decreasing but still high unemployment. Thus, underlying inflation pressures have remained relatively muted to date. Inflation expectations for the end of 2011 remain within the target band of the Central Bank of 5.5±2%, although above its mid-point. Estimates for 2011Q1. Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey; Turkstat; OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. The external deficit widened sharply in 2010, reaching 6.6% of GDP. Despite recent competitiveness gains, imports grew strongly in the early months of 2011, far outpacing exports. Oil price increases contributed to the deterioration (every $10 increase in oil prices raises the external deficit by 0.5% of GDP). Tensions in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region – which absorbs 25% of total Turkish exports of goods – damped manufacturing exports, although they also improved prospects for tourism in Turkey. The external deficit continues to be easily financed, but mostly by reversible short-term capital inflows. Capital inflows of undetermined origin – possibly related to unrest in neighbouring countries – have recently accelerated. Since December 2010, a new monetary policy has been implemented, combining low policy interest rates (to stem capital inflows) with sizeable increases in banks’ required reserves (to slow credit growth). So far, this policy mix has helped to restrain currency appreciation. Credit growth has slowed in certain areas, but exhibits considerable inertia overall. In April 2011, total credit outstanding was still 35% above its level a year ago. Policymakers assert that the targeted credit containment will be secured, if necessary with additional regulatory measures. It is indeed essential that domestic demand starts to slow down already from the second quarter of 2011. OECD projections are predicated on the achievement of this goal. Credit conditions are then expected to normalise in 2012, and policy interest rates are projected to rise. Fiscal policy was kept tight through 2010. The bulk of central government windfall revenues from stronger-than-expected growth in 2010 appears to have been saved. No significant fiscal drift has been observed in the run-up to legislative elections in June 2011, although there are signs that agricultural transfers and public investment have significantly accelerated. Indeed, total primary government spending has recently been rising much less than GDP and tax revenues. OECD projections assume that this fiscal stance will be maintained through the projection period, although additional tightening may become necessary through the year. After the postponement of the previously planned fiscal rule, a simpler explicit public expenditure ceiling at the general government level would help anchor fiscal policy. The external deficit increases rapidly every time the economy accelerates. As Turkey’s very high energy dependence cannot be reduced in the short term, it is crucial to strengthen external competitiveness and rebalance the sources of growth. Structural reforms would help reduce the cost of doing business in the formal sector. A regional differentiation of minimum wages, taking into account differences in productivity levels and living costs, would support not only price competitiveness, but also non-price competitiveness by facilitating the development of formal firms, which have higher productivity than informal ones for a number of reasons. GDP is likely to grow by about 6½ per cent for the year as a whole in 2011, reflecting a policy-induced deceleration through the year. Growth is then projected to pick up strongly in the course of 2012 after the normalisation of credit conditions, with annual growth of about 5½ per cent for the year as a whole. If capital markets were to become uncomfortable with the high and rising current account deficit, some abrupt exchange rate adjustment might ensue, creating financial strains. Any new civic tensions in the MENA region may also depress external demand. On the other hand, if policy-driven restraints prove less effective than intended, growth may be too strong and put excessive pressure on resources. Stronger growth in Europe would lift exports and growth. DEVELOPMENTS IN SELECTED NON‑MEMBER ECONOMIES Strong growth in the course of 2010 removed all slack from the Brazilian economy. Massive infrastructure spending will support strong domestic demand in the coming years. Inflationary pressures are therefore a threat, as labour markets will remain tight and the effects of the significant currency appreciation will dissipate. Accordingly, the central bank has resumed monetary tightening, including introducing numerous macro-prudential measures to restrain credit expansion. However, additional interest rate increases are necessary to prevent inflation expectations from becoming unanchored. The announcement of public spending cuts that will leave social and infrastructure programmes untouched is welcome, but credibility would be enhanced by the formulation and implementation of a medium-term growth-enhancing fiscal consolidation plan. Over the medium term, fostering the development of long-term financial markets would augment the country’s capacity to absorb capital inflows and raise potential growth. The Brazilian economy slowed in the second half of 2010 from the solid growth rates seen earlier in the year, reflecting the withdrawal of some policy stimulus. While the manufacturing sector continued to suffer from the currency appreciation, household confidence points to very strong activity in the first quarter of 2011. Domestic demand has been the main engine of growth, outstripping supply and resulting in markedly increased imports. Private consumption has been supported by credit expansion and increasing labour incomes. Investment has been robust, as infrastructure projects from the Growth and Acceleration Programme have got underway. By contrast, exports have been damped by the steady appreciation of the Central Bank of Brazil, IBGE and OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Abundant global liquidity and attractive returns in Brazil have led to capital inflows and currency appreciation. Overall, the real effective exchange rate has kept strengthening, after a 9% appreciation during 2010. Although expected and actual growth in oil production may have pushed up the equilibrium exchange rate somewhat, the central bank has actively intervened and international reserves are now close to USD 300 billion. Past successive increases in the Imposto sobre Operações Financeiras Inflation expectations have edged above the central bank’s target range mid-point. The rise in CPI inflation since late 2010 reflects a surge in food and beverage prices and, to a lesser extent, housing prices, while the currency appreciation has been tempering price increases since mid-2009. Rising inflation expectations threaten to pass through into costs, adding to price pressures. The positive output gap has also exerted pressure but to a much lesser extent. Inflationary tensions are expected to persist, even as commodity prices stabilise, as the effects of the currency appreciation dissipate and demand remains strong. The unemployment rate has fallen to a record-low level, and labour markets are tight. Against this background the Central Bank has taken both conventional and unconventional measures. It tightened reserve and capital requirements in December, increased the tax on consumer credit and lifted its policy rate by a total of 125 basis points, to 12%, since the beginning of the year. Acknowledging that the costs of bringing inflation down to 4.5% in 2011 may be too high, the Central Bank has shifted its focus and aims to guarantee inflation convergence to the target by 2012. It has also signalled it would adopt a gradualist approach and rely heavily on macro-prudential measures. In the current environment, this strategy is not without danger. Core inflation might rise further, and entrenched expectations of higher inflation would be detrimental to the Bank’s long-term credibility and make subsequent disinflation more costly. While macro-prudential measures may help to restrain credit growth, they should be considered only as a complement to conventional monetary tightening. Fiscal policy was strongly expansionary during the recovery, fuelling an unsustainable path of rising domestic demand and contributing to a rapid deterioration of the current account. The authorities have announced a BRL 50 billion spending cut in the 2011 federal budget, corresponding to about 0.5 percentage point of GDP compared with 2010 (after correcting from the capitalisation of the state-owned oil enterprise which artificially boosted spending in September 2010). To achieve this goal, the government plans to target discretionary spending while safeguarding social and infrastructure programmes. Early signs are promising, as public revenues expanded at a much faster pace than spending in the first quarter of the year. Following some moderation this year, the minimum wage is set to rise by 13% in 2012, with ripple effects on the growth of social security benefits, which are linked to it. Nevertheless, the primary balance target is expected to be reached both in 2011 and 2012, but only with the use of contingency measures, such as the exclusion of some infrastructure spending. The announced spending cuts are a welcome first step toward fiscal consolidation. However, the government needs to persevere with efforts in this direction, to ease both inflationary pressures and capital inflows. The credibility of the fiscal consolidation would be enhanced by committing to a multi-year budgetary programme, which would reassure markets that measures will not be reversed in the coming years. Domestic demand should continue to sustain economic growth, although it should gradually slow down in response to policy tightening. A recovery in investment would be supported by a solid economic backdrop and large infrastructure and energy-development programmes. Inflation may gradually diminish, but would remain in the upper part of the target range. The current account deficit is expected to stay at around 2% of GDP in 2011 and 2012. A key risk is higher inflation, which would endanger the Central Bank’s credibility. Capital inflows could exacerbate this risk, although a shift in sentiment that reversed such flows could cut growth. On the positive side, spending on infrastructure projects could be faster than envisaged. Tighter monetary conditions have reined in growth, which is projected to average around 9% in 2011-12. Inflation has continued to veer up, with the price of all demand components combined up by 6¾ per cent in the year to the first quarter of 2011. As excess demand in the economy is gradually eliminated and import prices stop rising, inflation should ease back in 2012. The current account surplus is set to fall to 4½ per cent of GDP (from over 10% in 2007), as result of slower export growth and higher commodity prices. In the first quarter of 2011, growth slackened to 8.7% (seasonally-adjusted annual rate), the lowest since late 2008. The deceleration was particularly marked in the primary and secondary sectors of the economy. Domestic demand slowed, as investment by state-owned companies was held back by credit constraints and a wind-down in the stimulus programme. Against this, housing completions have been picking up, boosted by the plan to build 10 million low-cost units in 2011. Retail sales continued to grow rapidly. Even though auto sales fell in the first four months of 2011, they were still running at an annualised rate of 14.5 million in April, double the rate two years ago. ... but inflation remains high Inflation has continued to rise. Annual CPI inflation exceeded 5% in recent months, with double-digit increases in food and gasoline prices. The rise in global crude oil prices has been fully passed on to consumers. However, private consumption represents only slightly more than a quarter of total demand. Prices for consumption, investment and exports combined rose faster than the CPI, and were up by 6.7% in the year to the first quarter. Cost inflation is also on the rise. In the past two years, the minimum wage rate in the southern city of Shenzhen was raised by 32%, though this partly reflected catch-up from a standstill in 2009. Similarly large hikes occurred elsewhere in the country. In addition, by the first quarter of 2011, import prices were up 16% on a year earlier. Against this, prices of electricity are controlled, resulting in local shortages. The trade surplus was on a declining trend until the spring. It had fallen to 2.5% of GDP by the first quarter of 2011, although it rebounded in April, in part because imports from Japan dropped by 5% due to supply-chain problems. The oil import bill is estimated to have risen by almost 1½ percentage points of GDP in the year to the second quarter of 2011, given the rise in world prices. Other commodity prices have also increased substantially. China’s share of world trade ceased to expand over the past year due to higher labour costs and export prices. The continued rapid accumulation of foreign exchange reserves, which by March 2011 exceeded $3 trillion, has pushed up investment income, helping generate a current account surplus of around 4.6% of GDP in the first quarter of 2011. CEIC, Peoples’ Bank of China and OECD estimates. Monetary policy has been tightened gradually since October 2010. Official interest rates have been raised, in steps, by a cumulative 114 basis points for three-month deposits. The required reserve ratio has been lifted by 3½ percentage points in total, reaching 21% in May for large banks. Tighter liquidity has pushed the interbank rate well above regulated saving deposit rates. In addition, the central bank introduced lending quotas for each bank. These measures have successfully restrained the growth of both money and credit to just under 16% over the 12 months to April, which is in line with the central bank’s monetary targets for 2011. However, the depreciation of the nominal effective exchange rate during this period has tended to offset the impact of higher interest rates and required reserves. Given continued high inflation, a further increase of 50 basis points in regulated interest rates may be needed to stabilise inflation. Fiscal policy continues to be run in a conservative fashion at the level of the national government. The fiscal deficit was reduced in 2010 and the government plans on a further reduction in 2011 of 0.5% of GDP. Tax revenues have been rising rapidly. This has given the government room to raise the threshold for income taxation substantially, so that, once again, no person earning less than the average wage will pay income tax and the bulk of taxpayers will face a marginal rate of 10%. Taking into account the continuing social security surplus, the general government may run a slight deficit in 2011 and a surplus in 2012. Local authority off-budget borrowing is being restrained this year and must be used to finance social housing. Tighter monetary policy will restrain growth in 2011. Investment growth is likely to remain weaker than in 2010, as lending is restricted. Further planned increases in minimum wages will push up average wages and unit labour costs, and fuel inflationary pressures. In addition, the higher cost of crude oil will push up consumer prices directly and, as importantly, raise the price of all transported goods with a lag. As a result, CPI inflation is projected to exceed the government’s target of 4% for 2011 as a whole. In 2012, more subdued import price increases should clip 1½ percentage points from the inflation rate, boosting real incomes. There should be no further need for monetary tightening in 2012 and growth is projected to edge back up again. The government’s target to raise wages by 15% annually for the next five years may result in a slight increase in the growth of unit labour costs, to around 5% per year. Higher domestic costs will erode competitiveness and, along with deteriorating terms of trade, will contribute to holding down the current account surplus to around 4½ per cent of GDP. Structural reforms, such as increasing competition in state-dominated sectors and services, would boost productivity and real incomes, strengthening domestic demand. Following a strong post-crisis rebound driven by a surge in private investment, growth slowed to a more sustainable pace towards the end of 2010. Going forward, growth will pick up somewhat, underpinned by buoyant corporate sentiment and demand for infrastructure spending. Tighter monetary policy and a modest reduction in the deficit will help cool demand somewhat. After moderating towards the end of 2010, inflation has veered up again and remains high. Moreover, inflationary pressures have become more generalised, with non-food prices accelerating. The recent increase in world oil prices has been passed through into domestic petroleum product prices only to a limited extent and higher energy subsidy outlays are likely in 2011. A renewed commitment to reducing subsidies is needed to lower the burden on public finances. Efforts to better target subsidies on the needy ought to be stepped up. Further liberalisation of foreign direct investment in the retail sector would promote competition and help modernise supply chains, thereby reducing food inflation pressures. After recording double-digit rates earlier in the year, growth slowed to a more sustainable, but still strong, pace in the fourth quarter of 2010. Much of the slowing reflected an unwinding of a strong post-crisis bounce in investment. Activity in the non-agricultural sector eased somewhat towards the end of the year and recent industrial production figures indicate this slowing has continued into 2011. In contrast, agricultural production has continued to expand at a brisk pace, consolidating its recovery from an earlier drought. Trade also rebounded strongly in 2010, with both import and export volumes rising above pre-crisis highs. The current account deficit has been large by Indian standards, but it narrowed in the fourth quarter, as imports moderated. Inflows of portfolio capital have also slowed to a more normal pace, following a strong rise earlier in the year. At the same time, equity prices have eased. Although headline inflation moderated from double-digit rates in the second half of 2010, prices have begun accelerating again. Moreover, inflation has become generalised. Higher oil prices have led to sharp increases in fuel and energy prices. A re-emergence of food inflation reflects in part localised supply constraints, but also rising incomes. Wholesale prices for manufactured goods have also accelerated, likely reflecting the emergence of capacity constraints in the wake of very rapid growth. In order to reduce food inflation pressures the government has announced several initiatives aimed at improving the food supply chain, including the upgrading of food storage facilities. These efforts could be complemented by further liberalising restrictions on foreign direct investment in the retail sector. Incoming budget data confirm that fiscal consolidation commenced in FY 2010, with the central government deficit estimated to have declined by over 1% of GDP, to around 5%. Consolidation has also resumed at the state level, ensuring an even larger improvement in general government finances. The reduction in the central government deficit was, however, significantly aided by one-off revenue windfalls, notably from the auction of 3G and broadband wireless licences. The central government budget plans for a further reduction in the deficit in FY 2011, underpinned by strong revenue growth and a sharp slowing in spending. In addition it commits to improve the delivery of some subsidies through direct cash transfers in 2012. However, in the meantime, the government raised subsidies on fertilisers. With crude oil prices remaining at a high level, the government is projected to split the costs of higher prices for oil-related products equally between consumers, oil companies and itself, leading to higher public spending. Altogether this additional spending is expected to amount to just over ½ per cent of GDP in FY 2011. Further pressure for higher spending could come from wage hikes under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and increased outlays on an expanded food subsidy programme. Eventually, the government may also have to recapitalise public-sector oil marketing companies. The Reserve Bank of India continues to tighten monetary policy incrementally. Since the exit from emergency policy settings in early 2010 the main repo rate had been raised by a total of 250 basis points, to 7.25% by May 2011. However, credit-market pressures, reflecting temporary imbalances between deposits and the demand for loans, have led to considerably larger increases in commercial borrowing costs. In the first quarter of 2011 the 3-month interbank rate averaged around 9½ per cent, around 170 basis points higher than in the fourth quarter of 2010. The renewed acceleration in prices and the generalisation of inflationary pressures increase the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored. It is therefore important that the Reserve Bank continues to tighten incrementally. Economic growth is expected to accelerate above its potential rate in 2011, buttressed by low interest rates, and then to slow marginally in 2012. External demand will remain strong, and investment is projected to gain momentum. Underlying inflationary pressures are building. Given the recent monetary ease, meeting the end-2011 inflation target will be challenging. Interest rates should be raised without further delay. Priority areas for fiscal policy, including infrastructure, secondary education and social policy, have suffered from slow budgetary disbursements, a worsening problem that will need to be tackled. Infrastructure investment could also be raised by improving the regulatory environment. In the face of high oil prices, the planned removal of fossil-fuel subsidies should not be delayed. Activity has expanded rapidly, driven by widespread growth across most sectors. Investment continued to grow fast, supported by massive direct investment inflows. Exports are rebounding after a dip in the first two months of 2011 related to licensing problems in the coal sector. Private consumption, which accounts for two thirds of demand, has been outpacing overall GDP growth recently. Inflationary pressures are mounting, not least due to infrastructure bottlenecks and rising commodity prices. Headline inflation has been lower than expected in early 2011 due to easing food prices, but the year-on-year rate is still over 6% and core inflation is accelerating. Business surveys point to further inflationary pressures in the near future, thanks to favourable economic prospects and significant capital inflows. Bank Indonesia (BI) raised the policy rate once by 25 basis points in February, following cumulative cuts of 300 basis points during the downturn. Besides rate increases, BI announced that it will rely on exchange-rate appreciation and macroprudential measures in order to control inflation without making Indonesia still more attractive as a destination for capital inflows. Though welcome instruments, they will not be able to replace urgently needed interest rate increases. Unless rates are raised immediately the end-2011 inflation target is at considerable risk. Further upgrades in credit ratings, which are now one notch below investment grade, will likely depend on successfully reining in inflation. Public finances are sound and the debt-to-GDP ratio is continuing to fall. Despite some reform efforts, government agencies continue to underspend and to skew spending towards the end of the year. Indeed, spending has again started very slowly in 2011 after having increased strongly in late 2010. To reduce underspending, especially on infrastructure investment and health insurance coverage, disbursement procedures should be simplified even further. Government revenues will increase due to strong growth, higher oil and gas revenues and export taxes. In the light of rising oil prices, the government has postponed the schedule for phasing out fossil fuel subsidies. This will make it more challenging to meet its earlier commitment of eliminating them by 2014, but will leave households with more disposable income in the short term. However, as energy subsidies are not an efficient way to combat poverty, and distort expenditure in undesirable ways, the original phase-out schedule should be maintained. Activity is projected to accelerate in 2011, buoyed by investment and exports and accommodative monetary policy. The pace of expansion is likely to ease somewhat in 2012 as the effects of interest rate hikes feed through. Strong investment increases are underpinned by solid credit growth, buoyant FDI inflows and new tax incentives for house purchases. Following free trade agreements in 2010, China and India are becoming increasingly important markets for Indonesia. Commodity exports, for which external demand conditions are positive, are likely to be robust, but manufacturing exports will also grow quickly. Reflecting strong domestic demand and rupiah appreciation, imports are expected to grow more rapidly than exports, almost eliminating the current account surplus. Unemployment should keep declining. Inflation is expected to gradually slow, but would at best remain in the upper half of the target range. Growth has picked up, supported by surging commodity prices, and domestic demand is expected to strengthen in the near term. Output is projected to grow by nearly 5% in 2011 and by 4 ½  per cent in 2012. As the effect of last year’s food price shock dissipates, disinflation should resume. The budget is projected to return to surplus this year, as revenues will exceed projections by a large margin due to higher-than-expected oil prices, but the non-oil deficit will remain large. The budgeted reduction of the non-oil fiscal deficit over 2011-13 is sensible. Pressure to spend the oil price windfalls should be resisted, not because fiscal sustainability is in immediate danger, but to avoid fiscal policy becoming procyclical and, more generally, to reduce the budget’s dependence on fluctuations in commodity prices. Restoring a fiscal rule would be helpful in this regard. Even in the absence of financing needs, the government should pursue its privatisation agenda, while also undertaking other structural reforms to reduce entry barriers and improve the business climate. Supported by rising prices for oil and other export commodities, real GDP increased by 4% in 2010, with a strong pickup in the fourth quarter to more than 11% (annualised rate). Gross capital formation in 2010 advanced particularly strongly, mostly on account of inventories. Notwithstanding very strong imports, the current account surplus widened as the terms of trade improved. The preliminary GDP estimate for the first quarter of 2011 indicates a slowdown to 2½ per cent annualised. Pronounced weakness in fixed investment appears to have undercut demand growth in the first quarter, although most high-frequency indicators pointed to continued strong expansion. Having hit a post-Soviet era low of 5.5% in July 2010, inflation picked up to 9.7% year-on-year in January before stabilising. The upsurge was largely driven by food price increases resulting from the heat and drought during last summer. The crop losses and the panic which set in pushed the price of cereals up by 85% in the year to April 2011, an increase that was then passed on to a number of other food items, such as meat and sunflower oil. Monetary factors also played a role, as a significant amount of liquidity was injected into the economy via only partially sterilised foreign exchange interventions and the running down of government deposits at the central bank to finance the budget deficit. Although underlying inflation pressures appear to be contained, given the negative output gap and broadly unchanged core inflation, the government has resorted to a number of interventions to bring the headline rate down, such as curtailing petrol exports, selling grain from reserves and holding down tariff increases for natural monopolies. Employment losses were limited during the crisis due to the adjustment in working hours and real wages, but the labour market recovery has lagged the rebound in output. Recent labour market developments show gradual improvement, with the unemployment rate continuing its downward trend and employment picking up in the first part of 2011. The federal budget deficit narrowed to 4% of GDP in 2010, down from 5.9% in 2009, and the 2011-13 budget foresees a further moderate fiscal tightening, with the large non-oil deficit gradually decreasing from its 2010 level of around 13% of GDP. Rising oil prices have boosted revenues and have improved the fiscal position faster than envisaged by the government, however. Based on current oil prices and spending plans, the headline budget deficit should be eliminated this year; the budget was already in surplus in the first four months of the year. Before the surge in oil prices, the government intended to divest its stakes in a number of large companies and banks. These privatisation plans should be pursued, even in the absence of financing needs, as this is one of the measures needed to reduce state control over economic activity. Notwithstanding the growth slowdown in the first quarter indicated by the preliminary estimate, domestic demand is expected to be strong in the near term, given the surge in oil prices which will feed through to higher incomes and faster credit growth. Bank lending has already been boosted by abundant liquidity and the improved creditworthiness of large resource-based companies. Given a high income elasticity of imports, faster growth in absorption should translate into import volume growth which will significantly outpace growth in export volumes this year and next. The current account surplus will nonetheless widen this year to about 7% of GDP due to higher oil prices before narrowing slightly next year. Output growth is projected to approach 5% in 2011, before moderating to 4.5% in 2012. Annual average inflation will exceed 9% in 2011, but then fall to 6.4% in 2012 as the impact of the food price shock fades away. The prices of export commodities, in particular oil and gas, remain the key risk factor. Higher-than-projected commodity prices would give a stronger impetus to domestic demand and further improve the fiscal and external positions. Private capital inflows may resume, fuelling demand but also complicating the conduct of monetary policy. In the context of the 2011 parliamentary and 2012 presidential elections, some fiscal loosening is likely, which would be unhelpfully procyclical. Growth prospects would be robust to a small fall in oil prices from the levels assumed in this projection, but a large decline would pose a significant downside risk. The recovery is expected to gain momentum this year, as strong external conditions and a resumption of employment growth support demand. Notwithstanding upward pressure from food and energy prices, the strong rand and the negative output gap should keep inflation within the Reserve Bank’s target range. Buoyant revenues are projected to shrink the budget deficit. After losing momentum in mid-2010, growth reaccelerated to 4.4% (seasonally adjusted annual rate) in the fourth quarter and appears to have remained solid in early 2011. Growth was led by private consumption, despite employment losses that continued for most of 2010. Employment appears now to be rising again, but as of the first quarter of 2011 remained some 6% below its pre-crisis peak. The strong currency appreciation in 2009 and 2010, combined with the negative output gap (estimated to be still around 3% of GDP), helped drive inflation down almost to the bottom of the Reserve Bank’s 3-6% target range by September 2010. Since then, higher food and oil prices have pushed headline inflation up, and it reached 4.1% (year-on-year) in March 2010. Core inflation remains moderate, however, and survey measures of inflation expectations have continued to move downward. The government’s existing three-year budget plans imply no deficit reduction in the current fiscal year and only a gradual improvement thereafter. The underlying assumptions regarding revenues are probably too cautious, and the outcome may therefore be somewhat better than budgeted. Nonetheless, given the favourable external environment and a cyclical recovery that is picking up steam, a more ambitious profile of fiscal consolidation should be implemented. This would not only safeguard fiscal sustainability but also contribute to raising national savings, reducing upward pressure on the exchange rate and crowding in private investment. Restraint in public sector wage increases would be one measure that would both contribute to fiscal consolidation and help establish a norm of wage moderation which would encourage private sector employment growth. This would complement other government measures to boost employment, which rightly remain a very high priority. Monetary policy was eased last year as the recovery lost momentum and the currency strengthened. When it becomes clearer that the output gap is closing, an upward move in interest rates will be called for, probably in the second half of 2011. In the meantime, unless the rise of international food and energy prices feeds through into higher inflation expectations and wage pressures, which has not so far been the case, the Reserve Bank should accommodate the implied one-off price increase. Output growth is projected to pick up to near 4% in 2011 and to be a bit faster in 2012, driven by strong increases in consumption and rising investment growth but with net exports exerting a drag as South Africa’s high propensity to import is reinforced by the strong real appreciation of the rand in the past two years. The output gap is projected to narrow only gradually, remaining negative throughout 2011-12, and the unemployment rate is expected to be still above 20% at end-2012. Headline inflation will trend downwards on a quarterly basis through the projection period as the effects of the food and energy price surge dissipate. Growth could well be significantly stronger than projected. For example, higher-than-projected commodity prices or capital inflows would provide further impetus to domestic demand. Prominent downside risks include the possibility that recent weakness in house prices continues, undermining household wealth and consumption growth. Another uncertainty relates to electricity supply – the crisis provided an interlude of lower demand, but now capacity margins are shrinking again and significant new capacity remains some way off, creating a significant risk of power supply constraining growth within the next two years. Medium and Long-term Developments: Challenges and Risks This chapter considers long-term macroeconomic prospects and risks for the OECD – stagnation combined with inflation – might arise as a consequence of continuing upward pressure on oil and other commodity prices. These risks are examined in the context of previous historical episodes of stagnation and the implications for policy are considered. Fiscal consolidation requirements for many countries are substantial. In Japan and the United States, stabilising the debt-to-GDP ratio would require an overall improvement in the underlying primary balance of 10 to 11 percentage points of GDP from the 2010 position, implying a protracted period of fiscal tightening. Other countries for which consolidation requirements are large include Greece, Ireland, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic and the United Kingdom, which all require consolidation of about 6 to 8½ percentage points of GDP from the 2010 position. In addition, for a typical OECD country, additional offsets of 3% of GDP will have to be found over the coming 15 years to meet spending pressures due to increasing pension and health care costs. Consolidation requirements would be much more demanding if the aim were to return debt-to-GDP ratios to their pre-crisis levels. For the OECD area as a whole the improvement in the underlying primary balance from the 2010 position that would be required to reduce the debt ratio to pre-crisis levels by 2026 would be more than 13 percentage points of GDP, compared to 7 percentage points to simply stabilise debt. The baseline scenario embodies a permanent reduction in the level of potential output as a consequence of the financial crisis, but no long-lasting effect on the growth rate. In contrast, a previous banking crisis in Japan in the 1990s ushered in a prolonged period of stagnation, characterised by low productivity growth, which was partly due to a failure to deal promptly with non-performing bank loans. In the current conjuncture this underlines the importance of resolving outstanding banking problems, especially in Europe where financial weakness and a lack of transparency about exposures represent a risk of stagnation. Many countries will be undertaking fiscal consolidation over a prolonged period and there is a risk that the sustained adverse effect on demand could delay the recovery and even risk stagnation. In this respect, countries face a difficult choice between front-loaded fast consolidation and more gradual consolidation. Fast consolidation has the advantage that it may reduce the overall scale of required consolidation and reassure financial markets, but it also increases the risk of adversely affecting the recovery particularly if monetary policy is constrained. To improve the terms of this trade-off, countries should put greater weight on measures which will improve long-term fiscal sustainability – for example raising retirement ages or containing future increases in health costs – but which have relatively limited immediate negative effects on demand. To reassure financial markets, it is also important to have a clear medium-term fiscal plan specifying objectives and the instruments that will be used. Consolidation should also avoid measures, such as reducing public investment or support for R&amp;D, which weaken the supply side and instead target measures which strengthen it. Other experiences of stagnation – including recent episodes in Japan, Italy and Portugal – suggest that weak structural policy settings may reduce the resilience of economies in dealing with shocks. Structural reforms are thus paramount, not only to bolster resilience against stagnation, but also to promote growth as well as strengthen public finances. The downturn has permanently reduced the level of potential output. For the OECD as a whole, potential output is estimated to be around 2½ per cent lower in 2012 when compared with projections made prior to the crisis. This represents a loss of more than a year’s growth for the region as a whole. Underlying the loss are reductions in capital endowment as firms have adjusted to the end of cheap financing and increases in long-duration unemployment resulting in hysteresis-type effects leading to higher structural unemployment. With the start of the crisis now further in the past, estimates of the magnitude of its impact have become clearer with more data. Changes in trend participation rates and capital can now be estimated from recent data and projections to 2012. They indicate that the impacts of the crisis on participation and capital inputs are sizeable but somewhat less dramatic than initially expected. For the median OECD country, the impact on potential output is around 3¼ per cent in 2012. The difference the OECD as a whole is attributable to the variability of the impact of the crisis, as well as a disproportionate negative effect on some of the smaller countries, including Greece and Ireland, which are experiencing losses as large as 13% of potential output by 2012, relative to earlier projections. ). Most of the assumptions underlying the scenario tend to be relatively optimistic – beginning with the proposition that the crisis itself only reduces the level of potential output and has no permanent adverse effect on its growth rate and by the assumption that fiscal consolidation does not affect growth. Output gaps are also generally assumed to close by 2015 as a result of sustained above-trend growth with output growing in line with potential thereafter. In a few countries where the output gap in 2012 is exceptionally large, such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain, the output gap takes longer to close ( The baseline represents a stylised scenario that is conditional on the following assumptions for the period beyond the short-term projection horizon that ends in 2012: The gap between actual and potential output is eliminated by 2015 in all OECD countries, except those where the output gap remains very large in 2012. In the case of the latter, for every 2 percentage points by which the output gap exceeds 6% at the end of 2012 it is assumed to take an additional year to close the gap. This means that for Greece the output gap closes in 2018 and for Ireland, Portugal and Spain in 2016. Once the output gap is closed, GDP grows in line with potential output. Participation rates evolve from 2013 to 2026 in a manner consistent with a dynamic cohort effect (Burniaux, Duval and Jaumotte, 2004). The effects on participation of pension reforms legislated up to 2009 have been incorporated. Unemployment returns to its estimated structural rate in all OECD countries by 2015. For most countries historical estimates of the structural unemployment rate are based on a Kalman filter method described in Gianella et al. (2008). Since then the structural unemployment rate for Poland has also been estimated using the same Kalman filter method. For a few countries, Chile, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Israel, Mexico, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia, the structural unemployment estimates are based on a Hodrick-Prescott filter of unemployment. Over the post-crisis period a hysteresis effect is imposed on the structural unemployment rate which is then assumed to eventually return to pre-crisis levels but at a speed which differs across countries based on previous historical experience (Guichard and Rusticelli, 2010); for those countries with more flexible labour markets structural unemployment returns to pre-crisis levels by 2018 and for other countries by 2026. Non-oil commodity prices remain unchanged in real terms, while oil prices rise by 1% per annum in real terms after 2012. Exchange rates remain unchanged in real terms in OECD countries; real exchange rates for non-OECD countries appreciate in line with growth differentials (through the so-called Balassa-Samuelson effect) from 2012. The adverse effects on the level of potential output resulting from the crisis have reached their peak by about 2013. After 2012, non-OECD economies show a slow convergence to US growth rates in per capita income (measured in purchasing power parities). For the period 2015 to 2026, OECD countries experience a slow convergence to annual labour productivity growth of 1¾ per cent. From 2013 onwards for those countries where the debt-to-GDP ratio is rising, there is a gradual increase in the underlying fiscal primary balance of ½ percentage point of GDP per year through a combination of reduced government spending and higher taxes until the ratio of government debt to GDP is stable given long-term trend growth and long-term interest rates (see Box 4.4 of No.88 for further details). The rule is asymmetric so that countries for which the debt ratio is falling are not assumed to undertake fiscal expansion. It should be noted that in many cases this assumption implies a degree of fiscal consolidation which is less ambitious than incorporated in current government plans. In addition, the stylised fiscal rule applied here is not necessarily consistent with national or supra-national fiscal objectives, targets or rules. From 2013 onwards, the growth rate of OECD-wide potential output recovers to average about 2% per annum ( ), below the average potential growth rate of 2¼ per cent per annum achieved over the seven years preceding the crisis. Most of the difference is due to slower growth both in participation rates and in the working-age population, mainly reflecting demographic trends rather than additional effects from the crisis. Output is assumed to return to potential by 2015 for most countries Given the assumption that negative output gaps close by 2015 in most countries, and despite slower potential growth, area-wide GDP growth averages almost 3% per annum over the period 2010-15 ( ), compared to 2½ per cent per annum over the period 2000-07. Unemployment is falling in all countries, with the area-wide unemployment rate down from 8¼ per cent in 2010 to a rate of just over 6¼ per cent by 2015 and just under 6% in 2026, reflecting both the recovery and, perhaps also optimistically, the reversal of post-crisis hysteresis effects. Most non-OECD countries continue to have strong growth… Non-OECD countries are included in the baseline using a growth convergence assumption where eventually all countries have productivity growth that is roughly equal to a historical OECD average (1¾ per cent per annum). Since convergence is very slow, this leads to continued strong growth in all the emerging economies – particularly China, India, Russia and Brazil. Strong growth in these regions continues to be a major source of export demand in some OECD economies such as Germany and Japan. … and imbalances remain to be addressed by structural reforms Global imbalances, measured in terms of the absolute sum of current account balances divided by world GDP, are projected to increase while not reaching the levels that were attained prior to the crisis. Policy changes to encourage domestic demand in surplus countries and policies to encourage saving in deficit countries can do much to alleviate global imbalances. OECD work on structural policy reform provides guidance in removing distortions that contribute to imbalances. For surplus countries – such as China – this includes removing the incentive for precautionary savings that come from weak government social safety nets – including medical services and retirement pensions, as well as establishing a legal framework facilitating the development of the domestic financial system. In OECD countries, this includes removing incentives for greater consumption in deficit countries ( e.g.  e.g.  Fiscal deficits are projected to remain large in 2012, with a substantial component which is not explained by the cycle ( ), even with an assumption that announced fiscal consolidation plans are implemented in full up to 2012 (see Beyond 2012 consolidation is assumed to follow a stylised rule As a stylised assumption for the baseline, against which alternative fiscal policy scenarios are evaluated, future fiscal consolidation sufficient to stabilise the ratio of government debt to GDP before 2026 has been incorporated ( ). This relatively modest pace of consolidation – assumed to be ½ per cent of GDP per annum reduction in the underlying primary balance from 2013 maintained for as long as it takes to stabilise debt – means that in many cases there is a further build-up in the ratio of government debt to GDP before it levels off. This makes the requirements for consolidation more challenging still, since debt build-up requires more servicing and thus a higher primary balance to stabilise debt. Moreover, as discussed below, an important factor tending to further increase consolidation requirements is that the differential between interest rates and growth rises over the projection. On the other hand, the effects on fiscal balances from population ageing and continued upward pressures on health costs are not explicitly included in the projection, but these will also add to consolidation pressures ( Most OECD countries require some consolidation beyond 2012 to stabilise debt ratios The scale of consolidation required to stabilise debt-to-GDP ratios both in relation to 2010 and, following the projected consolidation, from 2012 is summarised in . For less than one-third of OECD countries shown in the table, the efforts announced already for the short term are sufficient to require no further consolidation to stabilise debt beyond 2012. This category includes Italy, for which the debt ratio is initially very high, but is already on a declining path, and Spain, for which the required consolidation of 4 percentage points of GDP is projected to have already taken place by 2012. On the spending side of general government budgets, additional pressures arise from ageing populations and increases in longevity as well as rising health care costs. On the basis of unchanged policies, and generally conservative assumptions, increases in public spending on health care, long-term care and pensions over the next 15 years are estimated to amount to between 1% and 6% of GDP in the OECD area, largely as a result of ageing (see Table). In the typical OECD country, about two-thirds of that change is coming from health and long-term care expenditures. Public expenditure on pensions has been growing faster than national income for the past 20 years and is expected to continue to do so over coming decades. Ageing populations are putting pressure on public pensions which are increasing in all but four OECD countries where data are available, amounting to 1% of GDP by 2025 on average. Nevertheless, as a consequence of past pension reforms, which lower benefits and increase the age of retirement, the rate of growth of pension expenditure will be much slower than demographic change alone would have implied. There is, however, scope for further reform. In particular, although half of all OECD countries have, or will be, increasing statutory pension ages, in all but a handful the projected gains in life expectancy over the next four decades are expected to exceed the prospective increase in pension ages (OECD, 2011). For the average country the increase in public health and long-term care spending over the next 15 years of about 2 percentage points of GDP is about double that for pensions. This is on the basis of a so called scenario in which, on top of demographic effects, expenditures are assumed to grow 1% per annum faster than income, which would be broadly consistent with observed trends over the past two decades. This reflects rapidly rising health-care prices and developments of new and costly treatment which put upward pressure on health-care budgets. Spending on health care is already one of the largest public spending items, accounting for more than 15% of general government spending on average in the OECD in 2007 (equal to more than 6% of GDP), up from 12% in 1995. OECD analysis, comparing the efficiency of health systems across different countries, suggests that there is considerable potential for efficiency gains; estimates suggest that public spending reduction could amount to 2% of GDP on average for the OECD area and over 3% of GDP for Greece, Ireland and the United Kingdom (Joumard et al. Substantial consolidation is needed in a number of countries Among those countries requiring the most consolidation, the United States and Japan are the only countries in which the stylised unambitious consolidation path does not stabilise debt by 2026. For both countries the required improvement in the underlying primary balance in 2010 is about 10 percentage points of GDP, with little improvement in this situation by 2012. Other countries for which consolidation requirements are large just to stabilise debt before the middle of the next decade include Greece, Ireland, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic and the United Kingdom, which all require consolidation of about 6 to 8½ percentage points of GDP from the 2010 position. Given the large improvement in the underlying primary balance which is projected to occur between 2010 and 2012, no further consolidation beyond 2012 is required for Portugal, and consolidation of only 1½ to 2 additional percentage points of GDP is required for Greece and the Slovak Republic beyond 2012. For the other countries – Ireland, Poland and the United Kingdom – a further consolidation of 3 to 4½ percentage points of GDP beyond 2012 is required to stabilise debt. Consolidation requirements to stabilise debt over the long term These estimates of total consolidation requirements are, however, dependent on the speed at which consolidation is undertaken. In general, faster consolidation implies that debt stabilises at a lower level, causing lower debt service and requiring less overall consolidation. As an illustrative example, Ireland requires seven years of consolidation beyond 2012 to stabilise debt in the baseline scenario in which 0.5% of GDP consolidation per year is assumed, implying total consolidation of 3½ percentage points of GDP. Alternatively, in a variant scenario in which there is more rapid consolidation of 1.5% of GDP per year, only two years of consolidation are needed to stabilise debt, implying total consolidation of only 3 percentage points of GDP. However, this result needs to be qualified, because rapid consolidation runs the risk of having a larger cumulative adverse effect on GDP than gradual consolidation, particularly over a period when any offsetting response from monetary policy may be constrained, and this in turn would reduce any difference in the total consolidation required. Together with the level of the primary balance, debt dynamics are also strongly influenced by the differential between growth and interest rates; higher nominal GDP growth reduces the debt-to-GDP ratio (simply by virtue of increasing the denominator), while higher interest rates raise it by increasing debt service. During the years prior to the crisis, this differential between interest rates and growth was unusually favourable to restraining the build-up of debt; the differential between long-term interest rates on government bonds and nominal potential growth was negative for many OECD economies, compared to an average positive differential of over 200 basis points over the 1980s and 1990s ( The differential between long-term interest rates and nominal potential growth for 20 OECD countries The 20 OECD countries have been chosen on the basis of having consistent time series estimates for potential output and long-term interest rates on 10-year government bonds from 1983. Using nominal potential growth instead of actual GDP growth abstracts from the cycle and so gives a better impression of trend movements in the differential. … which is likely to be much less favourable than prior to the crisis See Box 4.5 in OECD (2010b) for a selective survey. Drawing on this literature, for the purpose of the current exercise it is assumed that when gross government indebtedness passes a threshold of 75% of GDP then long-term interest rates increase by 4 basis points for every additional percentage point increase in the government debt-to-GDP ratio – an assumption consistent with, for example, the findings of Égert (2010) and Laubach (2009). Égert (2010) finds that the difference between short-term and long-term interest rates appear to be a non-linear function of public debt for the G7 countries (excluding Japan) in recent years. The estimation results indicate a 4 basis point increase in long-term rates relative to short-term rates for each percentage point of GDP in public debt above 76%. Laubach (2009) focuses on the United States and finds that long-term yields increase about 25 basis points per percentage point increase in the projected deficit-to-GDP ratio, and 3 to 4 basis points per percentage point increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio. et al. et al. et al. , 2010; and Dötz and Fisher, 2010). The consequence of assuming that interest rates in Japan become as sensitive to the debt-to-GDP ratio as for other OECD countries would be to put debt on an explosive path, implying that gradual consolidation of ½ percentage point of GDP per annum would be inadequate even if sustained over several decades. OECD general government gross debt is projected to increase by about 32 percentage points of GDP by 2012 relative to pre-crisis levels and, under the assumptions set out above, by about a further 17 percentage points of GDP by 2026. By assumption, the change in net debt levels, as a percentage of GDP, is similar to that for gross debt, although the level of net debt is lower, particularly for Japan, Canada and the Nordic countries. Net debt is in many respects the superior concept, however, gross debt is more comparable across countries and represents what has to be rolled over and financed through government debt issuance. Moreover, valuation of government assets may in many cases be subject to considerable uncertainty, see  The magnitude of the area-wide increase in debt is a reflection not least of the magnitude of the increase in some of the largest countries; in particular, the increase in debt by 2026 compared to pre-crisis levels for the United States and Japan is over 80 percentage points of GDP, whereas the median increase across all OECD countries is 21 percentage points of GDP. The slow pace of consolidation and the high levels of debt reached are in practice unlikely to be sustainable in some countries. The extent of fiscal consolidation needs to be much larger if the aim is to significantly reduce debt-to-GDP ratios, rather than merely stabilise them. Such a reduction would avoid high debt levels and associated high interest rates undermining economic growth and provide a safety margin for public finances to tackle future shocks. Calculations of the cumulative improvement in the primary balance that would be required from 2010 to reduce debt either to pre-crisis (2007) levels or to 60% of GDP by 2026 imply a much greater consolidation effort than to merely stabilise the debt ratio; for the OECD as a whole, on top of the 7 percentage points of GDP to stabilise debt, they imply additional consolidation of 5¼ and 7 percentage points of GDP, respectively ( Among countries requiring substantial consolidation… Most governments recognise the need for further consolidation and have objectives that imply moving back towards more sustainable fiscal positions. Among a group of 12 OECD countries where consolidation needs are greatest ( … US medium-term fiscal plans are unclear... … and those of Japan appear inadequate In Japan, the government’s medium-term fiscal objectives, announced in June 2010, aimed at halving the primary deficit of the central and local governments by fiscal year (FY) 2015 and eliminating it by FY 2020. This objective is broadly consistant with the stylised baseline scenario to 2020 described above. This in turn implies that, unless there were to be a significant increase in the pace of consolidation thereafter, the debt ratio might not stabilise by 2026. In any case, a detailed medium-term consolidation plan that identifies the revenue and spending measures that will be implemented to achieve these long-term objectives is a priority. Very substantial front-loaded consolidation is planned in those euro area countries – Greece, Ireland and Portugal – that have been under pressure from financial markets and requested assistance from the European Union and the IMF. The extent of the planned consolidation beyond 2012 exceeds the stylised rule and would be sufficient to put the debt-to-GDP ratio on a clear downward trajectory. … and in the United Kingdom The fiscal consolidation planned in the United Kingdom is both more substantial and more rapid. If achieved it would put the debt ratio on a downward trend from 2015. The relative speed with which the consolidation is to be achieved implies that the debt ratio would remain below the level projected in the stylised scenario. Other EU countries requiring substantial consolidation to stabilise debt – France, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Spain – have targeted a reduction in the overall fiscal deficit to 3% of GDP or below, over the next two to four years. In Belgium and Italy, the deficit targets are closer to balance, but this is warranted to ensure that the debt ratio is put on a clear downward trajectory given the higher initial level of debt. However, for all of the aforementioned countries, detailed consolidation measures to achieve these targets need to be specified to enhance the credibility of the consolidation plan. Alternatively, Reddy and Minoiu (2009) define the onset of a stagnation spell as a year in which a country’s per capita real income is lower than at any time in the previous two years and higher than at any time in the subsequent four years. The stagnation spells ends in the first year in which that country’s real income is at least 1% higher than it was in the previous year and at least 1% lower than in the subsequent year. The authors found that real income stagnation has affected a large number of countries: 103 out of 168 in their sample during the period 1960 to 2001. Recent stagnation spells in OECD countries include Greece (1981-87), Iceland (1990-94), New Zealand (1988-92) and Switzerland (1992-96). Using potential output eliminates cyclical fluctuations and, although the 1% treshold and the minimum length of spells are arbitrary, the criterion is stringent enough to ensure that the stagnation episodes identified will be both protracted and severe. Applying this criterion to all OECD countries over the period 1995 to 2009 identifies three different episodes: Japan from 1997 to 2002; Portugal from 2003 to 2009; and Italy from 2004 to 2009. Stagnation followed the 1990s banking crisis in Japan... The catalyst for the banking crisis in Japan was the collapse of share and land price bubbles at the end of the 1980s, which led to a rise in non-performing loans as construction and real estate companies stopped repaying their loans. Although the problem of bad loans was already obvious by 1992-93 when the non-bank housing loan companies ( ) became insolvent, the authorities chose to adopt a wait-and-see approach because of the large scale of under-capitalisation and insolvency problems in the banking sector. The start of the stagnation episode in 1997 coincides with a sharp escalation of the crisis as a large bank and two large securities firms failed. Share prices of weaker institutions fell, mild bank runs occurred and interbank lending seized up. The resulting credit crunch led to a fall in investment and a cutback in consumption, which in turn fed into weaker growth and further cuts in credit, with the resulting downturn being given further impetus by the Asian crisis in 1997/98. … which explains the subsequent poor productivity performance... … although other factors may have played a role ) as a result of ageing, which subtracted more than ½ per cent per annum from GDP per capita growth over the stagnation episode. Portugal’s stagnation episode was preceded by a credit boom... Portugal experienced a credit boom prior to its stagnation episode, which began in 2003. During the five years leading up to monetary union, the nominal long-term interest fell by more than 5 percentage points in Portugal (as well as in Italy and Spain), compared with an average of around 3 percentage points for the euro area as a whole. From 1995 to 2000, the current account deficit rose from virtually zero to more than 10% of GDP as households borrowed massively to finance both consumption and housing (household indebtedness reached 103% of disposable income in 2002 from 39% in 1995). This borrowing fuelled domestic demand, and economic growth in Portugal averaged 4% during the five years to 2000, exceeding the euro area average by 1½ percentage points. When it became clear in the early 2000s that the expectations of continued rapid growth and catch-up on which the spending boom had been premised were not going to be realised, both personal and corporate saving went up and consumption and investment fell sharply, triggering a slowdown, which, combined with a tightening of the fiscal stance, morphed into stagnation. The contribution of growth in capital per worker to growth in potential output per capita fell sharply over the stagnation episode: from 1.3 percentage points on average in the decade to 2003 to only 0.4 percentage points per year over the stagnation episode ( … and weak structural policy settings have made it difficult to end it Portugal may have had difficulty shaking off this low-growth period due to weak structural policy settings (OECD, 2010a). Relative to its OECD peers, in 2003 Portugal had low educational attainment, low upper-secondary graduation rates, high public ownership and state control of business operations, restrictive barriers to entry in numerous industries, restrictive regulation in some sectors (such as transport, gas and retail), a relatively high cost of labour, an onerous marginal tax wedge on labour for high earners, strict employment protection legislation and low public support to R&amp;D. The resulting rigidities and the absence of reforms have meant losses in competitiveness as new big players like China increasingly competed with traditional Portuguese exports and businesses were not able to move up the quality chain. This lack of competitiveness has contributed to the economy remaining depressed for many years and is reflected in slower growth in the capital-labour ratio after the credit boom ended. There is no obvious trigger event, such as a banking crisis or the ending of a credit boom, coinciding with the start of Italy’s period of stagnation from 2004. Rather, the slowdown in potential growth was long in the making and involved a long-term decline in investment and in trend productivity growth that started in the early 1990s (OECD, 2009a). Such trends are most easily ascribed to weak structural policy settings, which may also have made Italy more vulnerable to shocks or to significant economic changes and thus more likely to experience stagnation. Italy compares poorly against other OECD countries in respect of educational attainment, public ownership and state involvement in business operations, administrative burdens on entrepreneurship, legal barriers to entry in industries, barriers to foreign direct investment, the restrictiveness of regulations in certain sectors (road, post, professional services), marginal tax wedges on labour and protection for collective dismissals. Such weaknesses have contributed to a persistent and pronounced trend deterioration in measures of competitiveness based on relative unit labour costs. They have also been reflected in a deterioration in the contribution of total factor productivity growth to potential output per capita growth during the stagnation years as well as weaker growth in the capital-labour ratio. Historical experience shows that financial crises (often related to bursting asset bubbles) are usually accompanied by a significant rise in non-performing loans (NPLs). Although the circumstances of the current financial crisis are unique and often country-specific, they share several important parallels with the Nordic (Sweden, Finland and Norway) and the Japanese financial crises of the early 1990s. In both cases, bursting financial asset and property bubbles led to financial turmoil and to recessions. However, the policy responses to the crises were very different: i.e.  regulators ignore banks’ solvency problems and allow them to make up for unrecognised losses through time (Blundell-Wignall and Slovik, 2011). Consequently, the Japanese crisis dragged on unresolved for the entire 1990s, often referred to in Japan as the . NPLs reached a peak of 9% of total loans only in 2003 and the banking sector recovered only by 2005. In contrast, in Nordic, governments requested insolvent banks to recognise losses promptly and to transfer bad assets to state-owned asset management companies at book value (OECD, 2009b). Existing shareholders were wiped out and the government took direct ownership of the banks. NPLs in the Nordic countries peaked at around 9% already between 1992 and 1993. The crisis was resolved by 1994, after which business and consumer confidence retuned and the economy recovered. After a brief period of forbearance in Ireland – also evident by the failure of the 2010 EU-wide stress test to uncover solvency problems – the banking sector had to recognise very large losses in late 2010. The Irish Financial Measures Programme conducted in early 2011 recognised a further capital shortage of e 24 billion on top of the measures already taken last year (Central Bank of Ireland, 2011). Recapitalisation efforts are also underway in Spain, where in early 2011 the Banco de España required the banking sector to increase its capital base by at least a further e 15 billion (Banco de España, 2011). A second source of concern about growth prospects is the build-up of government indebtedness in the aftermath of the crisis. Results from a relatively small literature suggest a negative impact on growth once government debt passes a certain threshold, typically around 75% or 90% of GDP. In Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), the median real per capita GDP growth rate in advanced economies falls by one percentage point when gross public debt reaches 90% of GDP and average growth falls even more. In Kumar and Woo (2010), each 10 percentage point increase in the gross debt-to-GDP ratio is associated with a slowdown in annual real per-capita GDP growth of about 0.15-0.2 percentage points per year for advanced economies, the effect being larger when debt goes above 90% of GDP. Applying these results in a ready reckoner fashion to compute the effect of the recent and projected build-up of government debt can lead to rather alarming conclusions: if applied to the baseline projections described above for the OECD area as whole, the estimates imply a loss in the trend GDP growth rate of ½-¾ percentage point. Moreover, many OECD countries would appear vulnerable with the gross debt-to-GDP ratio in more than half of all OECD countries projected to rise above 75% and in nearly one-third of OECD countries above 90%. The transmission mechanism by which this occurs is likely to involve higher interest rates and a crowding out of private investment and R&amp;D, with adverse consequences for trend productivity growth. ) – but in each case the direction of causation seems to suggest more strongly that stagnation was a cause of the more rapid build-up in government debt rather than a consequence. There is unfortunately a trade-off between slowing the accumulation of government debt to stave off its possible negative effect on growth, and the risks that fiscal consolidation itself may create sustained headwinds on the recovery and lead to stagnation. The size of the adverse demand effects will vary by country and depend on the size of the initial fiscal imbalance, the credibility of fiscal consolidation plans, the scope to cut policy interest rates, the fiscal instruments used and the speed of consolidation. Countries face particularly difficult choices regarding the speed of consolidation and the instruments to use, but both provide opportunities to minimise the negative demand effects from consolidation. Fiscal consolidation should be more rapid if there is scope for monetary policy to offset some of the negative demand effects. If the recovery proceeds at the projected pace, the constraints on monetary policy should be less of a concern from 2012 onwards for most countries and the pace of normalisation of interest rates could be then adjusted to partially offset any economic weakness resulting from budget improvements. The contractionary effects of fiscal consolidation could also be partially offset to the extent that credible programmes reduce the risk of sovereign debt defaults, reducing risk premia on government securities which in turn reduce interest rates more generally. Lower long-term interest rates can in turn help boost output in the long-run by raising investment and productivity. These positive expectational effects that work through financial markets are greater the more clear and credible medium-term fiscal plans are regarding the objectives and the instruments that will be used. … including by a judicious choice of measures Higher oil prices may contribute to stagnation but are unlikely to be a main cause A third factor that may hinder economic growth over the medium term is high and rising oil prices. Sharp rises in oil and commodity prices combined with macroeconomic policy mistakes led to stagflation in the 1970s. By draining away funds that consumers would otherwise spend on other things, high oil prices reduce consumption and demand in the short run (see ). But high oil prices can affect the economy’s supply side as well. They signify greater intensity in the use of other inputs (labour and capital) which are available only in inelastic or limited elastic supply, implying a fall in productive potential. Previous OECD estimates based on a four-factor Cobb-Douglas production approach (OECD, 2008) suggest that a doubling of real oil prices would reduce the steady-state of output by about 1¾ per cent in the United States and about 1¼ per cent in other (less energy-intensive) OECD economies. Assuming the shock was in the form of a trend increase in the growth rate of real oil prices, so for example real oil prices doubled over the course of a decade, the medium-term effects of rising real oil prices could reduce the growth rate by 0.1-0.2 percentage points per annum. Still, it seems more likely that rising real oil prices would be a contributory factor to stagnation rather than a principal cause, especially if attendant revenues accruing to oil-producing countries are recycled into safe government securities in major OECD countries, so lowering long-term interest rates. Though not a risk of stagnation because it is already included in the baseline scenario presented above, population ageing and accelerating retirements will provide a negative backdrop to growth prospects across the OECD. No OECD country is expected to have such a large demographic drag on the growth of potential output per capita as Japan has been experiencing over the past decade, but in nearly all OECD countries a falling demographic support ratio is expected to start pulling per capita growth down within the next ten years. Looking at the 2020-25 period where the demographic effect will be most significant, the drag on annual growth in potential output per capita will be ¼ percentage point per annum or more for several countries. On the other hand, policy changes, especially in public pension provision, and economic necessity may push up the old-age participation rate and increase the average retirement age, offsetting some of the projected impact, which effectively assumes that the maximum age of the working population is fixed at 65. Structural reforms can help avoid stagnation… … and boost long-term growth, thus facilitating fiscal consolidation Not only can structural reforms reduce stagnation risks, they can also boost medium- and long-term growth. OECD research has shown that a gradual alignment to OECD best practices of product market regulations, job protection legislation, unemployment benefit systems, activation policies, labour taxes and pension systems could boost aggregate labour productivity levels by several per cent over the next decade in many OECD countries, with large continental European countries such as Italy having the largest benefits to reap from reforms (Bouis and Duval, 2011). By raising potential growth, such reforms would at the same time facilitate fiscal consolidation and help tackle some of the specific legacies of the recession, not least weakness in labour markets that could otherwise turn out to be more persistent and cause higher structural unemployment than assumed in the baseline (see Nearly two years after production began to recover from the worst recession to have hit OECD countries since the 1930s, the labour market situation remains a major preoccupation. At the end of 2010, the average OECD unemployment rate was still close to the historical peak reached during the crisis. In 12 OECD countries it remained two percentage points or more above the pre-crisis level, and even where the rise in joblessness was less severe, the recovery has been generally too weak so far to allow for a significant fall in unemployment ( ). A main concern in countries most severely hit is that persistently high levels of unemployment – and a rising share of unemployed workers facing long spells without a job – will eventually result in widespread deterioration of human capital, discouragement and labour market withdrawal. The risk is strongest for youth and less skilled workers who have been disproportionately affected by the rise in unemployment. The main purpose of this chapter is to assess the role of policies in facilitating a swift return to work so as to minimise these risks. Given the slack remaining in economic activity and labour utilisation, together with still-anchored inflation expectations, aggregate demand policies have a role to play in supporting the economic recovery and stimulate jobs. Indeed, monetary policy remains strongly expansionary in most OECD countries whereas unsustainable public debt path in several of them has necessitated a turn towards fiscal consolidation. Recommendations in the area of macro policies are discussed at length in e.g.  Austria, Belgium, Finland, Germany, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg and the Netherlands). The ability of these countries to cushion the employment impact of the crisis may offer lessons that could help improve labour market resilience to future shocks. Concerns that average hours worked and productivity remain below pre-crisis levels well after the recovery are not addressed in this chapter and concerns that labour hoarding and time-sharing arrangements hamper the reallocation of resources across businesses and sectors (if maintained for too long) are also not extensively addressed, though the role of time‑sharing policies is discussed. However, a striking feature of the current situation is an unusually high share of long-term unemployment in the United States, occurring against the backdrop of a sharp rise in unemployment and a trend decline in outflows from unemployment. While the US outflow rate remains significantly higher than in continental EU countries, and although the US unemployment rate has begun to decline, such developments raise concerns about future persistence of unemployment. At this stage there has been little evidence of widespread labour force withdrawals, but protracted slack in labour utilisation raises the risk that unemployed workers drift out of the labour force. Past evidence suggests that the peak effect of downturns on labour force participation could display a lag of up to 3 or 4 years. In parallel to boosting labour demand, and to offset the risks that unemployed workers see their skills eroding to the point of losing attachment to the labour market (through so-called unemployment duration dependence or hysteresis effects), more could be done to improve the matching of workers and jobs, including through measures to strengthen public employment services and training programmes. As the risk of missing a job opportunity by suspending job search to enrol in training is lower in periods of labour market slack, there is a case for strengthening vocational training given the high rate of unemployment among youth and low skilled. Such training could also provide a surrogate test for participants’ willingness to work. However, in countries where the financial space for manoeuvre is limited by severe budget constraints ( e.g.  e.g.  Short-time working schemes can be useful but subsidies should be phased out A large number of countries have encouraged short-time working during the crisis. The significant role played by these programmes in cushioning the crisis – especially in Belgium, Finland, Germany, Japan and Luxembourg – suggests that having such options in place and being able to activate them in severe downturns, can be useful. Such short-time working arrangements should include, as for instance in Germany and the Netherlands, built-in incentives for workers and firms to withdraw from them once they have outlived their conjunctural purpose. And, insofar as the schemes do not have sufficient auto-corrective incentives, a timeframe should be set for the phasing-out of public subsidies so as to avoid negative long-term effects on productivity and labour utilisation. In some countries, the impact of the crisis on unemployment has also been cushioned by restrictions on the dismissals of workers on permanent contracts. However, given that tight employment protection provisions – whose costs are often high and unpredictable for employers – reduce outflows from unemployment, there is now a case for streamlining such provisions, especially where substantial risks of unemployment persistence prevail. In particular, systems entailing large differences in protection across different types of contracts – which have contributed to labour market duality in countries like France, Italy and Spain – may have generated unemployment turnover for certain categories of workers ( e.g.  Labour markets adjusted differently across countries… In most countries, the crisis took place in a context of low or falling trend unemployment rates, especially relative to the levels prevailing in the mid-1990s. To some extent, this broad improvement in unemployment resulted from labour market reforms implemented in the late 1990s and early 2000s. A number of areas where governments have been particularly active during that period include: Several countries have eased employment protection legislation, but reform in this area since the early 1990s has generally focused on the conditions of temporary contracts or taken the form of new types of contracts with different characteristics and restrictions. In a few cases, this has made the labour market more adaptable to macroeconomic conditions, but these reforms have also added to segmentation between permanent employees enjoying stronger job protection, and a growing share of temporary workers bearing the brunt of workforce adjustment (OECD, 2006; Saint-Paul, 1996; Boeri, 2010). Reform activity has been more limited in the area of collective bargaining and wage setting, at least as far as legislative changes are concerned. While there were virtually no changes in provisions to extend administratively bargaining outcomes to non-covered parties, some countries have implemented reforms aimed at changing workers’ representation mechanisms and allow firms to opt out of collective agreements in certain cases. As a result of this and, especially, of an increasingly competitive global and domestic environment, some movement towards decentralisation of wage bargaining has taken place in many countries. Indeed, the period of wage moderation observed in Germany during the 2000s is to some extent an illustration of the greater flexibility firms have had in adjusting collective wage agreements so as to better reflect local conditions. e.g.  Germany). Overall, this led to an increase in the average stock of employees participating in such schemes by more than 2% of all employees in 5 countries (Belgium, Germany, Italy, Japan and Luxembourg). Other measures such as public-sector job creation or private-sector job subsidies and reductions in non-wage labour costs were implemented in at least half of OECD countries. For the most part, governments avoided measures such as direct or indirect job support targeted to specific sectors that could have hampered a necessary restructuring and created international trade tensions (with the main exception of car manufacturing which benefited from demand support). But some of the policy interventions may nevertheless unduly contribute to delay adjustments in the workforce if maintained for too long. Indeed, many of the measures introduced in 2009 were meant to be temporary and a few countries have partially or fully withdrawn some of them, notably the reductions in non-wage labour costs and the subsidies for short-time work. However, the vast majority of countries kept the measures in place in 2010 and in some new ones were brought in, such as for instance a payroll tax cut implemented for 2011 in the United States. A comprehensive review of labour market reforms over that period can be found in Chapter 3 of OECD (2006). … in terms of productivity, average hours worked and employment In both Spain and the United States, productivity growth over the period exceeded trend estimates. Even though hourly productivity gains have been frequently observed during previous recessions in the United States the extent of the increase in 2008-09 has been surprisingly strong (Wilson, 2010). In many countries, unemployment persistence remains the most pressing near-term concern… e.g.  Share of people unemployed for more than 12 months in total unemployment … reflecting in some cases persisting demand gaps One reason for concern is that even though a recovery has been underway for some time in the majority of OECD countries, growth in aggregate demand has generally been too weak to begin making serious inroads into unemployment. Indeed, the substantial slack in labour productivity and average hours worked that has built up in the wake of the crisis has provided ample room in the majority of countries for accommodating GDP growth through more intense use of currently employed workers. Furthermore, even though GDP is generally expected to grow in 2011 and 2012 faster than productivity and the labour force combined, in several cases the slack may be absorbed too slowly to allow for a significant decline in unemployment over this horizon. Only when growth garners sufficient momentum, unemployment will begin to recede more rapidly and eventually returns to its longer-term or structural level. Another factor that could influence the pace of decline in unemployment is the evolution of labour costs. In most countries, wages decelerated sharply, with the adjustment taking place one or two quarters after the recession began. Arguably, that wages reacted moderately to the severity of the output contraction was helpful to limit the risks of deflation at the trough of the recession, as this would have further complicated the task of demand policies. Still, the slowdown in wages in late 2009 and early 2010, combined with a rebound in productivity, was sufficient to bring about a deceleration in unit labour costs (and even a decline in several countries) which helped stem employment losses ( The persistence of unemployment is strongly linked to the outflow rate… i.e.  Average from mid-2008 to the latest available observation. Except Ireland and Turkey 2006-2007. In the United States, the outflow rate from unemployment – defined as the probability that a worker exits unemployment within the following month – has fallen during the recent crisis to levels well below those observed during the previous major recession episodes even though it remains, at around 15%, above the level that has been the norm in many European countries. Since inflows into unemployment have also been falling in parallel, the trend decline in outflow rates had not led to an increase in the aggregate unemployment rate. Nevertheless, the fact that the US outflow rate had already been fluctuating around a clear downward trend over the past three decades suggests that an eventual return to pre-crisis levels may be hampered by structural forces working in the opposite direction. … which in turn depends on job creation and matching efficiency Aside from the strength of aggregate demand and the responsiveness of wages to economic conditions, which affect the pace of job creation, one of the key structural determinants of outflows into jobs is the efficiency with which jobseekers (be they unemployed or already in a job) are matched with job openings (matching efficiency). Factors having an influence on matching efficiency include the degree of mismatch across regions or industrial sectors between job openings and workers looking for a job, as well as the overall intensity and effectiveness of the individual’s job search, which may diminish as the average unemployment spell lengthens. Clear evidence on the efficiency of the matching process is hard to come by… e.g.  The percentage of low-skilled workers in construction is 1½ times larger than in the overall economy in the European Union and twice as large in the United States. Employment growth between average in 2008 and 2010Q2 e.g.  Matching efficiency may also deteriorate if long-term unemployment becomes a trap for the individual. In this regard, a key concern is that as time goes by and unemployment spells lengthen, duration dependence – that the probability of leaving unemployment declines as an unemployment spell becomes longer – may take hold. Empirical evidence on duration dependence is mixed. For instance, one study using aggregate unemployment duration data found evidence of duration dependence in Japan, English-speaking and Nordic countries, but not in Continental European countries (Elsby Hysteresis refers to a situation where unemployment shows little tendency to revert to its previous level following an increase, regardless of the source and nature (temporary or permanent) of the shock causing the rise. In such a case, the distinction between the cyclical and trend components of unemployment rates may lose practical relevance. The risk of hysteresis has become a major concern, not least because of the social consequences for the individuals directly affected. Both hysteresis and its corollary – a high incidence of long-term unemployment – have plagued several continental European countries, going as far back as the 1980s. They have also become a concern in the United States since the recent crisis, following the unusually strong increase in the incidence of long-term unemployment (Aaronson i.e.  i.e.  duration dependence (for details see Dantan and Murtin, 2011). Observations on individual unemployment spells are exploited to assess the influence of unemployment duration on the probability of moving from unemployment into a job. The dataset used is composed of 17 national panels of individuals whose monthly status on the labour market has been observed over the period 2005-07. These data show that in countries where the unemployment outflow rate is relatively high on average, it also tends to exhibit a steeper decline as durations increase. This is the case in general for English-speaking countries, Nordic countries and the Netherlands. In other words, the exit probability is much higher for short-term than long-term unemployed in these countries. Conversely, in countries where the average outflow rate is relatively low (a majority of continental European countries) it is also more stable across unemployment durations. The role of policies in mitigating or reinforcing the duration dependence effect can also be assessed in this framework. The influence of two types of policies has been examined more closely, namely the duration of unemployment benefits and spending on active labour market policies (ALMPs). As regards the former, several empirical studies have found a link between benefit duration and the average length of the unemployment spell (for a recent survey, see Krueger and Mueller, 2010). For example, recent estimates have suggested that the combined federal-state extension of benefit in the United States from 26 weeks to 99 weeks (or 90 weeks on a national average) in response to the crisis could, if maintained, raise the average length of the unemployment spell by between 1½ to 3 weeks corresponding to about ½ to 1 percentage point on the unemployment rate (Aaronson Measures of dispersion of regional unemployment rates show no clear indication of mismatch , panel A). Although contraction of the labour force was observed in about half of the countries for which data are available, by mid-2010, a decline of 1 percentage point or more in labour force participation rates had been observed in only six countries (Finland, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Norway and the United States). In some countries, patterns of labour force participation may also have reflected reverse migration flows in the aftermath of the crisis ( e.g.  Percentage points change in labour force participation rates from 2007Q3 to 2010Q3 , panels C and D), who may be harder to redeploy and more prone to discouragement effects than other categories of workers. At the same time, falling labour force participation may to some extent be less of a concern for youth when the alternative is prolonged schooling, especially if this leads to genuine skills acquisition through a completed programme and a diploma (OECD, 2010b, Chapter 1). ., (2010) also find that the sensitivity of youth participation to downturns increases with the ease of access to post-secondary education and can be up to 1½ percentage points higher in countries with generally higher enrolment rates. In this context, some form of mandatory vocational training may be the best way to maintain attachment to labour market and improve human capital (OECD, 2010b, Chapter 4). , panel B) could in part be explained by reforms implemented in many countries and which have led to the closing of many benefit routes to early retirement. And, in contrast to recession episodes of the 1980s and 1990s, governments have not encouraged premature withdrawal of older workers in the vain hope of reducing youth unemployment according to a view of the market. In some countries, the severe capital losses incurred by many private pension funds or individual early retirement savings schemes may have induced older workers to extend their active life in order to sustain prospective incomes (OECD, 2010c, Chapter 5). Relative to past recession episodes, all these factors point to diminished risks of labour force withdrawal among older workers despite the persistence of unemployment. The exceptions are Finland, where disability rates have been brought below their early 1980s levels, as well as the Netherlands and the United Kingdom where the trend has been partly reversed during the 2000s. Episodes of cyclical peaks in unemployment followed by spikes in disability rates The rising proportion of long-term unemployed raises risks of increases in disability inflows… e.g.  … though the risks are mitigated by earlier reforms However, two factors could help mitigate this risk. One is the fact that older workers have not been as severely affected in the last recession as compared with earlier episodes. Since the probability of people aged between 50 and 64 years experiencing chronic health-related problems or disability is more than twice that of the total working-age population (OECD, 2010d), their relatively good employment performance during the recession should help lower the likelihood of a steep hike in disability enrolment in the near term. The impact of policies on unemployment: summary of priors based on available evidence In normal economic conditions, the potential drawbacks of relatively high or durable benefits on unemployment outflows and persistence can, in principle, be partly offset by their potentially positive effects on the quality, and therefore the duration, of job matches (see OECD, 2010a, for a discussion). Benefit extension was necessary during the crisis… … but should be reconsidered as the recovery gathers momentum ). Indeed, many empirical studies – especially ones using micro data – have found that the average length of unemployment spells is significantly influenced by the duration of unemployment benefits. In any case, benefits should be conditional on job search and acceptance even from the early stages of the unemployment spells. Making the de facto Job-search assistance and training need adequate resources… In the context of the recovery, there is a case for ensuring that resources devoted to job-search assistance are commensurate to the increased task. This holds in particular in countries where the average caseload per staff providing public employment services is likely to have risen substantially during the crisis given the sharp increase in registered jobseekers. Between 2007 and 2009, the number of jobseekers has increased by at least 50% in the Czech Republic, Greece, Ireland, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States, and the average caseload per staff has increased in most countries (OECD, 2010a). … in particular for youth which can benefit most from vocational training Taxes affect both the level and persistence of unemployment… … and cuts in payroll taxes can be an effective way to boost employment Hence, in the context of the recovery, cuts in payroll taxation might in principle represent an attractive option to provide a near-term boost to labour demand and reduce the risk of persistence. Several countries have indeed implemented cuts in social security contributions or payroll taxes in response to the crisis. The advantage of such measures is that their impact can be fairly rapid and, in principle, they can be put in place on a temporary basis – though knowledge that they are temporary may reduce their effectiveness. However, the measures that are easier to implement, such as for instance cuts to non-wage costs of all existing jobs below a certain wage level, are also the least cost-effective in the short term (OECD, 2009). By comparison, cuts in payroll taxation targeted at new hires (so-called gross hiring subsidies) are less expensive and involve a smaller deadweight loss (OECD 2010a). For this reason they are to be preferred over across-the-board cuts, not least in a context of fiscal consolidation. Targeting new hires that involve a net increase in jobs (so-called marginal job subsidies) constitutes in principle an even more effective policy, notably because it avoids e.g.  … and could be introduced as part of a broader tax reform On a longer time frame, in countries where tax wedges remain high, a reduction in social security contributions could be envisaged as part of a revenue-neutral tax reform package that could shift the burden towards tax bases that are less damaging for employment and growth. Based on recent empirical work, prime candidates among potential tax bases would be immovable property (see Arnold e.g.  Bassanini and Duval, 2006; OECD, 2011, Chapter 3) reflected in e.g.  A recent analysis based on the examination of earnings at the individual level has found that employees on fixed-term contracts earned on average substantially lower wages relative to those on permanent contracts, even in the case of individuals with similar education and experience (IMF, 2010, Chapter 3). Reforms of employment protection legislation may help to boost hiring… ) to reduce the uncertainties related to the application of employment protection legislation for regular contracts so as to reduce the legal and other procedural costs, thereby allowing firms to better internalise the cost of the severance payment in their hiring and wage determination decisions; and ) to better integrate legislation on temporary and regular contracts, for instance by introducing mechanisms for a smooth transition between trial and open-ended phases of a worker’s career, with variable degrees of employment protection along this trajectory ( e.g.  … at little or no budgetary cost The crisis has brought new insights Pre-crisis reforms in benefit and activation systems, aimed at broadening coverage, tightening eligibility, increasing conditionality and making work pay, have made a number of countries better prepared to cope with the rapid increase in unemployment, notably by raising the effectiveness of the emergency measures taken in response to the crisis. In this regard, one lesson emerging from the recent episode is that during periods of bleak labour market prospects it may be possible to extend the duration of unemployment benefits without unduly undermining financial incentives to seek work – provided that such extension remains temporary (OECD, 2011, Chapter 1). In many countries, the reduction in average hours worked during the 2008-09 recession has limited the decline in employment given the observed drop in output. In part, hours adjustments rather than headcount adjustment have taken place due to work-sharing arrangements, partly operated The effectiveness and cost-efficiency of STW schemes have been discussed at length in OECD (2010a) and Hijzen and Venn (2011). Although an empirical assessment of their long-term effects is not yet possible, STW schemes have helped preserve permanent jobs during the economic downturn while promoting reductions in average hours among permanent workers. In Belgium, Finland, Germany, Italy and Japan, STW schemes are estimated to have substantially reduced the impact of the crisis on permanent employment. Hijzen and Venn (2011) estimate that about 234 000 and 416 000 jobs have been saved in Germany and Japan, respectively, thanks to these schemes. the crisis. This may indicate real difficulties in implementing an effective and timely STW scheme after a recession has begun, as the rate of layoffs tends to be higher in early phases of an economic downturn (OECD 2010a, Chapter 5). It also suggests that short-time work programmes could be set up and kept dormant in times of normal activity, and activated if necessary at the onset of future economic downturns. of short-time work schemes is desirable to minimise the displacement effect. In practice, phasing out can be ensured by a regulatory maximum duration of STW schemes, which was on average equal to 14 months during the crisis (excluding Finland where there is no time limit). This duration limit was substantially increased in Austria, Germany and Switzerland in 2009. It is difficult to determine the optimal timing for scaling down STW programmes, but to avoid hysteresis effects in hours worked, it is important that working-time regulations return to normal within a reasonably short amount of time. Getting the Most Out of International Capital Flows Financial globalisation can be both a blessing and a curse This chapter has two purposes: firstly, to examine the long-term drivers of global financial integration and international capital flows; and secondly to assess the associated vulnerabilities. The focus is on how policies can help to make the most of capital flows both by promoting global financial integration and limiting the associated risks, consistent with the G20 goal to promote strong, sustainable, and balanced global growth. Particular attention is given to the potential role of structural policies – broadly defined to include development of financial markets, general regulatory quality, as well as product market regulation that promotes competition and employment-friendly labour market policies – and how they could complement sound macroeconomic policies and ongoing financial, prudential and macro-prudential reforms which, although not investigated here, have key roles in reducing financial vulnerabilities (see et al. from developing and emerging countries to advanced countries, several emerging countries are now facing large capital inflows. The most recent data (although sometimes only available to the third quarter of 2010) suggest that gross capital inflows seem to be back to, or above, their pre-crisis levels in several countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa, where they already represent around 5% of GDP, and Chile and Turkey, where they have reached close to 8-9% of GDP. Such large inflows create a real macroeconomic challenge for these economies, given the associated risks of excessive currency appreciation, credit booms and busts and sudden stops. The question of the use of capital controls is being more and more debated (see for instance Ostry International reserves can help countries protect themselves against financial crisis caused by currency outflows. But reserve accumulation in some countries has reached levels far beyond average observed behaviour, related to motives of smooth trade financing and self insurance against outflows, and has become an important driver of capital flows from emerging to high-income countries. To the extent that excess reserve holding indicates mistrust in international financial safety nets, the improvement of these safety nets, which is already part of the G20 agenda, is essential. ). From mid-2007 to September 2008, the contraction concerned mainly OECD countries’ international banking flows (see Milesi-Ferretti and Tille, 2010 for more details). However, the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 precipitated a broader reversal of international capital flows, demonstrating the complexity and rapidity of the international transmission of financial shocks and the financial vulnerabilities associated with increased international capital flows. See footnote 2 for more details on the capital flow data. 2010 global cross-border flows are estimated using available quarterly data. Countries’ international financial positions are measured as the absolute sum of all countries’ gross assets and liabilities positions (taken from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) and IMF Balance of Payments Statistics after 2004) as a share of world GDP (taken from the IMF World Economic Outlook database). Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007); OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; OECD calculations. The recovery in financial flows has not been broad based Capital flows have partially rebounded since spring 2009, but in a very heterogeneous way. They have mainly been driven by a bounce back in portfolio investments from advanced to emerging countries, which have proven quite resilient to the global crisis and have been seen as underweighted in international portfolios (see especially Suttle ., 2010). As a result, in 2010, although overall cross-border flows remained well below pre-crisis levels, several countries – including Chile, Korea, Mexico and Turkey in the OECD and some large emerging markets – have faced large capital inflows. International financial integration in the 2000s and its main drivers Global financial integration accelerated prior to the crisis driven by… International financial integration accelerated in the decade prior to the financial crisis. The size of annual gross cross-border flows increased considerably from about 5% of world GDP in the mid-1990s to about 20% in 2007. what are referred to throughout the chapter as capital flows should instead be referred to as financial flows. Annual cross-border flows are measured by the acquisition of assets abroad (equity and debt securities, cross-border lending and deposits, and foreign direct investment [FDI]) where transactions are recorded in net terms and shown separately for financial assets and liabilities (  net transactions in financial assets is acquisitions of assets less reductions of assets, not assets less liabilities). FDI is defined according to the  net increase in liabilities) or debit (gross outflows,  net purchase of assets) while capital flows refers to the difference between gross inflows and gross outflows. Stocks of assets and liabilities used in this paper are from Milesi-Ferretti (2007) before 2004 and the IMF after 2004. They reflect both the cumulated annual flows in assets and liabilities and valuation effects, including exchange rate movements. As a result, international financial openness (measured by the sum of countries’ external assets and liabilities as a share of GDP) more than doubled over that period from 150% of world GDP to 350% in 2007, with a substantial acceleration during the 2000s ( … financial innovation and development... Further financial innovation and development in both emerging and developed economies accelerated global financial integration. The strong increase in international banking activity and the associated rising share of cross-border ownership of financial institutions together with changes in the funding structure of these institutions toward international capital markets have played a particularly important role, especially in the years prior to the crisis. Overall, according to the BIS, the value of external assets and liabilities of banks doubled as a share of world GDP from about 30% in 1990 to about 60% in 2007, with most of this increase taking place in the 2000s (see Milesi-Ferretti and Tille, 2010). Most of this activity was concentrated in advanced economies. … greater capital account openness... (AREAER) (see Chinn and Ito, 2008). This is the most commonly-used indicator in the recent empirical literature. It is available for 120 advanced and emerging countries in the 2000s (from around 75 in the 1970s). The index ranges from –2 to +2.5 with higher values implying greater openness. More disaggregated datasets have been constructed recently based on the same source, such as the one by Schindler (2009) which includes more disaggregated information on restrictions on inflows et al. de jure At present, the Code is a binding instrument for the 34 member countries of the OECD and allows countries to pursue liberalisation progressively over time, in line with their level of economic development. An adhering country enjoys the liberalisation measures of other adherents, regardless of its own degree of openness and OECD countries have unilaterally extended their measures to all members of the IMF. The Code provides flexibility to cope with situations of short-term capital volatility, including the introduction of controls on short-term capital operations and the re-imposition of controls on other operations in situations of severe balance-of-payments difficulties or financial disturbance. To avoid a beggar-thy-neighbour approach, or suspicion thereof, which could invite counter-measures, the Code provides an established process of international co-operation, managed and controlled through a forum, in which each country can explain its policies and raise questions about the policies of others. … trade globalisation... The rapid growth of world trade also contributed to the global financial integration through the creation of trade credits and export insurance. Still, international capital flows increased about three times more than world trade between 1994 and 2007. … European financial integration... Among advanced countries, the elimination of the intra-euro area exchange risk premium after the creation of the euro contributed to greater European financial integration (see Lane, 2010 and Waysand et al … increased attractiveness of emerging countries... … and cyclical factors The impact of these structural changes was exacerbated in the years to 2007 by cyclical factors including the prolonged period of low interest rates in advanced countries and windfall savings by commodity exporters. Financial development, capital account and trade openness were the driving forces The empirical analysis of the long-term drivers of financial openness across countries supports the role of these factors and in particular of financial development, capital account and trade openness as the main long-term forces driving world capital flows (see Furceri et al Banking flows within advanced countries dominated the pre‑crisis period The main contribution to the acceleration of world financial integration in the 2000s came more from advanced countries ( Average of inflows and outflows recorded by each region (both calculated as the sum of flows recorded by individual countries) as a ratio of world GDP; advanced countries are those defined as such by the IMF. See footnote 2 for more details on the capital flow data. Emerging markets started to contribute more to global financial integration in the past decade and their share in world capital flows increased from 7% to 17% between 2000 and 2007. Over that period, rising outflows from emerging and developing economies were mainly driven by reserve accumulation and invested in advanced economies’ sovereign debt securities or close substitutes, with about one-fifth of the increase corresponding to higher outflows from oil-exporting countries. This increase in reserve accumulation reflects several factors, including exchange rate policies, self-insurance strategies by emerging markets partly due to some mistrust in the current system of financial safety nets (see , 2009). Inflows to emerging and developing countries increased less than outflows and FDI remained the main overall source of international financing for these countries until 2007 when debt inflows became more important. World foreign reserve holdings have risen from around 6% of world GDP in 1999 to almost 15% in 2009, with this increase being overwhelmingly accounted for by Asian and oil-exporting countries. By the end of 2010 the foreign exchange reserves of China alone totalled almost $3 trillion or around half of its annual GDP and accounted for almost one-third of total global foreign exchange reserves. After a temporary slowdown during the global economic downturn, reserve accumulation across the world continued apace through 2009 and 2010. The reasons countries accumulate foreign exchange reserves fall into two broad categories. Firstly, reserves may be amassed as a direct consequence of export-led growth strategies and holding down the real value of the local currency. Reserves may also accumulate as a result of attempts to smooth short-term exchange-rate fluctuations. A second reason to hold foreign reserves is that they may provide a form of self-insurance against balance of payments crises, including sudden stops in access to external funding, or even just a means to smooth high-frequency volatility of flows. Traditionally, the focus was on adequately covering imports. In the late 1990s, following the Asian crisis, the focus shifted to covering a country’s stock of short-term debt (the so-called Guidotti-Greenspan rule). Then after the Argentine crisis, the scope of self-insurance broadened to include protecting local financial systems that are exposed to foreign market sentiment, capital flight by domestic agents and exchange rate movements. This evolution has implied a considerable escalation in the global demand for reserves. e.g.  Jeanne, 2007 and Jeanne and Rancière, 2008). These models generally conclude that current reserve holdings are well above optimal levels in the large accumulating countries. The second approach is to determine what factors account for reserve accumulation behaviour for a set of countries over time and then to make inferences about the behaviour of individual countries based on this ( e.g.  Recent OECD work has updated and extended the existing econometrics-approach literature using a panel of over 130 countries between 1980 and 2008 (see Vujanovic, 2011). The long-run determinates of a country’s reserve holdings are found to be trade openness and the size of the domestic financial sector (as proxied by M2), both of which may capture the self-insurance motives previously referred to. In addition to these factors, changes in GDP per capita, the exchange rate regime, exchange rate volatility and the degree of financial openness are associated with changes in the level of a country’s reserve holdings. This analysis suggests that the current ratio of reserves to GDP in the big accumulating countries is significantly above levels that are consistent with the average behaviour of all countries, even after taking into account developments in trade, financial deepening and other pertinent factors. Specifically, China and Japan record the largest deviations from the levels implied by the long-run cross-country determinants of reserves-to-GDP ratios, followed by South Korea, India and South Africa (see Figure below). Moreover, when expressed in dollar terms the  global  magnitude  of  these  deviations  stands  out  even  more;  on  average  over the three years to 2008, the analysis suggests that China and Japan held reserves in excess of what corresponds to average behaviour of around $600 billion and $450 billion, respectively. Furthermore, back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that in the case of China, where the accumulation of reserves accelerated after the end of 2008, the deviation from average behaviour eclipsed $1 trillion by 2009. In the case of Japan, large interventions in the foreign exchange market in 2003-04 dramatically pushed up the level of international reserves. So while the long-run level implied by average behaviour also climbed through to 2008 (on the back a surge in trade), a large (but declining) positive gap remains. Percentage points of GDP, average over three years to 2008 Net international investment positions have widened Several structural settings tend to be associated with lower net foreign asset positions including… … greater financial development and liberalisation and capital account openness… … better regulatory quality and product market regulations... is measured by the World Bank’s survey-based indicator of the perceptions of the governments’ ability to formulate and implement sound regulations promoting private sector development. It is widely used in academic research and transparency in the methodology and in the sources used has significantly improved over the years. However, its use could be questioned on a number of grounds including the fact that it is inherently subjective and relies on data collected using a large variety of sources (for more details see Furceri and Mourougane, 2010). The various shortcomings notwithstanding, for the OECD countries the indicator is highly correlated with the OECD’s et al. … as well as more flexible labour markets Going forward, growth enhancing reforms could attract more capital inflows… … in emerging and transition economies… If emerging market and transition economies improved their average level of institutional quality (as proxied either by OECD measures of product market regulation or the World Bank’s measure of regulatory quality) to the level of high-income OECD countries, this would eventually and be associated with a long-term reduction in net foreign assets by about 30 percentage points of GDP on average. … including China For China, reducing the gap with the OECD average in respect of regulatory quality by one quarter (as measured either by the World Bank indicator or the OECD’s PMR indicator) would eventually be associated with a reduction of the net foreign asset position by about 15 percentage points of GDP. Assuming that half of the effects of such reforms materialise over the first 10 years, China’s current-account surplus could be reduced by about ¾ percentage point of GDP on average over a decade. Global financial integration is good for growth but has risks The financial transmission of a shock is faster and more complex Large capital inflows create macroeconomic dilemmas… … risk destabilising the domestic financial system… … and may end up in a crisis Overall, large capital inflows make recipient countries more vulnerable to booms and busts and to financial crises and their associated economic and social costs. About 60% of 268 episodes of large foreign capital inflows (identified by large deviations of the net capital inflows-to-GDP ratio from historical trends in Furceri Large capital inflow episodes are defined as large inflows (as share of GDP) relative to the trend (and the normal volatility) experienced by each specific country. Banking and currency crises are from Laeven and Valencia (2008) where the starting dates of banking crises are based on a combination of quantitative indicators measuring banking sector distress and currency crisis episodes are identified when a currency has a nominal depreciation of 10% in one year and 30% overall. Sudden stops are defined as a large fall in a country’s net capital inflows. See Furceri Considering only OECD countries, about 40% of the 75 large capital inflow episodes ended in a sudden stop and about one in ten episodes in either a banking crisis or a currency crisis. The empirical analysis in Furceri et al. Based on regression results in Table 7 and Table 11 in Furceri et al. Currency and maturity mismatches resulting from these flows are an additional potential source of financial instability, and may amplify the impact of a sudden stop or currency crisis (see Park, 2010, for a discussion). Although mismatches are inherent to banking and intermediation activity, large mismatches may make countries extremely vulnerable to financial shocks, for instance, when banks hold local-currency long-term assets funded by short-term borrowing on foreign wholesale funding markets (as was the case in many European countries just before the crisis – a practice that has not totally disappeared). The costs of a financial crisis and exchange rate depreciation are also particularly high in countries with large foreign indebtedness (as depreciation may dramatically increase the cost of debt servicing and external financing dries up), and it may lead to a debt crisis. Structural settings can mitigate vulnerabilities associated with large inflows… The empirical literature largely finds that capital account liberalisation has a more favourable impact on growth when institutions are strong and of good quality, and when the financial system is deep and developed (see Tirole, 2002; Obstfeld, 2008; Kose et al., In particular, there seems to be a non-linear effect of capital account liberalisation on long-term growth that depends on the level of financial development, institutional quality (including strong property rights and accounting standards) and also, but less importantly, trade openness, labour market flexibility and the overall level of development (see Kose et al. The probability of a banking crisis following a large capital inflow episode under different policy settings Based on regression results reported in Table 7 in Furceri et al. i.e.  … notably by improving the composition of inflows the composition of these inflows. Better structural policies – a more liberal financial system, more open capital accounts, The impact of capital account openness is, however, ambiguous. While it is associated with a higher share of FDI in inflows and a lower probability of banking crises, it is also associated with a higher probability of a sudden stop in capital inflows after a large inflow episode even when controlling for the size of inflows. This may reflect the role played by some forms of capital controls in skewing the composition of inflows towards longer maturity and in limiting subsequent outflows and capital flights. This was the case in Chile in the 1990s and it may have contributed together with structural reforms, some liberalisation of capital outflows and sound macroeconomic policies to the large inflows recorded in the first half of the decade not ending up in a crisis, in sharp contrast with the experience of the late 1970s-early 1980s. In any case, this suggests that more work is needed, notably on the implications of the different types of capital controls. but also more pro-competition product market regulation and avoidance of overly stringent employment protection – are associated with a higher share of FDI and a lower share of debt (Furceri et al. ). Also FDI inflows are less volatile than debt and equity inflows and may be associated with lower risks of misallocation of capital compared with equity or debt inflows because they reduce asymmetries of information between foreigners and locals (see for instance Kirabaeva and Razin, 2010). Annual probability of banking crisis and sudden stops depending on the nature of the capital inflows Based on regression results in Tables 10 and 14 in Furceri et al. et al. et al. (2011a) suggest that if emerging market and transition economies increased their level of institutional quality in terms of product market regulation to the average level of OECD countries, this would be associated with an eventual increase in the stock of FDI by about 10 percentage points of the total stock of liabilities, and a corresponding reduction in the stock of portfolio liabilities. Similarly, an increase in their level of capital account openness to the average level of OECD countries would be associated with an increase in the share of FDI in the total stock of liabilities by about 5 percentage points, and a corresponding reduction in the share of debt. These results have to be interpreted with caution, not least because of the complex interactions between FDI and other capital flows. For instance, foreign direct investors may hedge the firm’s FDI exposure by borrowing domestically and then taking short-term capital out of the country. The overall effect of better structural policies on macroeconomic risks is, however, ambiguous. On the one hand, improved structural policy settings are likely to increase the overall scale of capital flows which will increase risk. On the other hand, better structural policies (more competition-friendly product market regulation, less stringent job protection, higher institutional quality and greater capital account openness) are associated with a composition of capital inflows – principally more FDI and less debt – which is more stable and less prone to risk. The overall net effect on macroeconomic risk will depend on the particular form of structural reforms enacted, but also on how they are buttressed by progress in financial reforms to strengthen the prudential and macro-prudential framework in both emerging and advanced economies.  countries which let their exchange rate fluctuate in response to inflows may reduce the duration of a net inflow episode;  higher exchange rate volatility (and thereby risk) may reduce credit growth by increasing risk premia and reducing foreign currency-denominated credit;  the alternative of foreign exchange interventions may create credit and asset prices bubbles if not fully sterilised;  and banks fund themselves less abroad when the exchange rate is more flexible. In addition, countries that typically follow countercyclical fiscal policy have, on average, experienced more moderate credit booms during large inflow episodes, and especially during debt inflow episodes ( et al. An example of a country which has been able to deal with large capital inflows while maintaining capital account openness is Australia in the late 1980s which benefited from high institutional quality, a liberalised and deep financial system and a tight fiscal policy. The response of private credit to large capital inflow episodes under different policy stances et al. Conclusions: the role of policies in making the most of global financial integration Countries’ net foreign capital positions are strongly influenced by their structural policy settings. … but in conjunction with appropriate macroeconomic and financial policies i.e.  (Hall, 1993, pp. 279). A prominent paradigm shift took place in the early 1980s when policies became more oriented towards the medium term and the supply side took centre stage in response to the stagflation of the 1970s. Since then there have been further developments in the paradigm, such as those associated with the rational expectations revolution which called for predictability and transparency of policymaking. The of stable growth and prices since the mid-1990s was seen as evidence of the paradigm’s success. However, favourable headline statistics masked growing underlying imbalances, and when these erupted with the financial crisis of 2008-09, established certainties again broke down and new approaches to policymaking came to the fore. This 50th Anniversary Special Chapter takes stock of the paradigm shifts in economic policymaking that have occurred since the Organisation began its work, both prior to the financial crisis and during it, drawing on the OECD’s key economic surveillance processes (see At its start in 1961, the OECD launched the publication of periodic for each member country, subjecting the OECD’s drafts to a full day of discussion before the Economic and Development Review Committee in the first systematic peer review process in any international institution. These pull together expertise not only in the OECD’s Economics Department, but increasingly also in specialised Directorates and Committees of the OECD. For several years now there have been periodic , Brazil, Russia, India, China, as well as Indonesia and South Africa. For a long time – most of the first three decades of the Organisation’s existence – the analyses the economic situation and prospects – with an eye to long-run sustainability – and the policy requirements to which they give rise. The first appeared six years after the Organisation started its activities, in 1967. The colophon in the first issue mentions that the … will appear initially twice a year, in July and December . In fact it has remained a biannual publication, aside from a special issue in March 2009 to cover the exceptional circumstances at the height of the financial crisis in the winter of 2008-09. Since 2005 the annual The discussion of the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s in this section draws on the 50th Issue Special Chapter of The 1960s and 1970 were dominated by the active use of In the 1980s the focus of policies shifted to the medium term. Structural policies to liberalise product and labour markets took centre stage, and were embedded in a system of rules-based policymaking in the 1990s. This proved largely successful, although financial crises became more frequent and virulent. In the 2000s emerging market economies gradually – but surely – gained weight in the global economy. Imbalances increased amid regulatory and policy complacency, which eventually led to the recent financial crisis. Testing the limits of demand management (1960s and 1970s) In the 1960s policy was conditioned by the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates. Fiscal and monetary policy instruments were used to restore full employment, low inflation and external balances whenever developments diverged from these objectives. The paradigm appeared to work well. The 1960s were a period of rapid OECD growth (averaging over 5%, see ), stable inflation (3¾ per cent) and – corresponding to OECD unemployment in the 3-3½ per cent range ( In per cent Refers to Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom and United States. The weight in world and total OECD GDP equal, respectively, 60 and 89% in 2005 (calculated at purchasing power parity). Refers to Chile, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Israel, Korea, Mexico, Poland, Slovak Republic, Slovenia. The weight in world and total OECD GDP equal, respectively, 7 and 11% in 2005 (calculated at purchasing power parity). Refers to Enhanced Engagement countries (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, South Africa and Russia). The weight in world GDP equal 23% in 2005 (calculated at purchasing power parity). OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Still, in this period policy setting became increasingly preoccupied with rising external pressures in several countries and a series of international monetary crises that led to occasional exchange-rate re‑adjustment. These pressures arose out of attempts to maintain fixed exchange rates at parities increasingly out of line with fundamentals in view of inflationary policies in the anchor country, the United States. Events in 1971 marked the end of this period. Pressure from international capital flows led to a series of policy actions, including exchange-rate realignments and periods of floating – most notably of the US dollar from August onwards after its gold convertibility had been abandoned. The so-called Smithsonian realignment in December 1971 brought little relief as exchange rate pressure continued and the Smithsonian parities broke down, with a generalised floating of exchange rates in early 1973. In 1979 the European Community launched the European Monetary System (EMS) of quasi-fixed exchange rates – the frontrunner of the single currency that was established in 1999. In the 1970s, inflation became a wide-spread problem – even before the oil shocks hit. Overriding importance was attached to avoiding any cost in terms of marked increases in unemployment in the battle against inflation. This was held to be possible if demand stimulus could be supported by incomes policies containing wage growth, although views of the effectiveness of incomes policies differed and sometimes fluctuated sharply. But when the first oil shock following the Yom Kippur War in late 1973 sent oil prices to unprecedented heights (Figure 5 below), OECD output sharply fell in 1975 while inflation soared to some 14%. No. 22 (OECD, 1977) noted that further expansionary policy action would be necessary while avoiding a very sharp pick-up of activity and an associated acceleration of inflation. No. 22 also argued that countries in strong balance-of-payments positions should take up slack faster than countries in a weak position. This view was contested by a number of countries, typically those identified as An uneasy consensus on a policy package was reached among the major seven (G7) countries at the Bonn Summit in 1978. Specifically, West Germany and Japan agreed to adopt fiscal stimulus measures in exchange for a commitment from the United States to raise its domestic oil price to world levels and the European commitment to reach a successful conclusion of the multilateral trade negotiations within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). But within a year of the implementation of the measures agreed at the Bonn Summit, OECD policymaking had to deal urgently with another large external shock: the sharp boost to inflation resulting from soaring oil prices in the wake of the Iranian revolution in 1979. In many countries, in combination with increased economic rigidities, the shock led to sharp rises in rates of structural unemployment, i.e.  The second oil shock brought to a head the debate about how to best get out of a situation in which inflation was rising while output was weak – and in which both had been affected adversely by a supply shock. This period saw the launch of structural reforms to make OECD economies more efficient, flexible and competitive – although modestly at first and with the United States and United Kingdom leading the way and Australia, Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands and New Zealand soon following suit. Monetary policy was geared to inflation control, for which limiting the growth of money supply initially was seen as crucial. Most OECD countries adopted or reinforced growth targets for monetary aggregates or – in Europe – continued to conduct their monetary policy so as to maintain exchange-rate parity between their currency and that of a country ( i.e.  Germany) that had been – and seemed likely to continue to be – successful in containing inflation. The result was an increase in real interest rates ( As policy regained a sense of direction in the course of the 1980s, private-sector confidence revived. This, together with the recovery of profits, the effects of financial market liberalisation and, in Europe, the prospect of the 1992 Single Market, underpinned a recovery of OECD economies. Employment increased at a pace not experienced on a durable basis for more than a decade, and the rate of unemployment followed a clear downward path ( See footnote 1 of See footnote 2 of See footnote 3 of OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Inflation did not decline as much as might have been hoped, in part because the monetary expansion to deal with the 1987 stock market crash was not reined in with sufficient firmness ( The Mundell-Fleming model, developed in the 1960s (Mundell, 1963, Fleming, 1962), predicted that if capital controls are removed a conflict between pegged exchange rates and monetary policy autonomy would result. In the 1980s international economic co-ordination among OECD countries was initially limited but gained prominence later on. Reluctance to co-ordinate stemmed in part from the perception that the ) pointed to an overvalued US dollar exchange rate – in part due to the mix of fiscal expansion and tight monetary policy of the Reagan administration – and were feeding into disquieting protectionist measures. This eventually led to a more active approach to international co-operation, important manifestations being the Plaza (September 1985) and Louvre (February 1987) accords to re-align exchange rates through intervention in exchange markets and the co-ordination of monetary policies. Other manifestations were the moves to deal with debt problems of lower-income countries and the decisive action to ensure that the October 1987 stock-market crisis did not provoke a global recession. See footnote 1 of See footnote 2 of See footnote 3 of OECD Economic Outlook 89 database. Current account balance, in per cent of world GDP Refers to Saudi Arabia before 1992. OECD Economic Outlook 89 database; OECD Economic Outlook 21 database; and IMF, International Financial Statistics. The adjustment burden of global imbalances initially tended to be borne by deficit countries alone. This was appropriate only insofar as a wide deficit reflected excess demand. However, after monetary policy was eased in response to the 1987 stock market crash, a financial and real estate bubble developed in Japan, which popped in the early 1990s. Similar developments were seen in the Nordic countries, as well as in the United States, culminating in the Savings and Loans and LTCM crises. Meanwhile, the analytical focus shifted to evaluating current account positions in the context of the balance between domestic saving and investment in each country. The recovery ended in 1991 when large private-sector debt positions unwound and policy was tightened in an attempt to limit inflation ( , respectively, took their toll. Activity in Europe was still buoyed by the boom in Germany associated with its reunification. But tight monetary policy in Germany to stem the boom led to exchange-rate turbulence within the EMS and eventually its breakdown, and pushed Europe into recession in 1993. A sobering assessment in the influential 1994 (OECD, 1994) concluded that clearly not enough progress had been made on the fiscal front in the 1980s and that this was exposed once economic conditions worsened. The A stability-oriented, predictable and credible macroeconomic policy was seen to assist microeconomic flexibility because private-sector participants could be more confident about medium-term prospects and thus adjust more easily to changing circumstances. When macroeconomic conditions are sound, moreover, structural reforms may be pursued more actively because the transition costs may be less painful. This approach found inspiration in the rational expectations hypothesis, which predicts that markets will produce optimal outcomes if forward-looking agents can trust policy-makers to be i.e.  The 1990s started on a weak note as all major OECD economies were in recession. Moreover, Japan entered its The 1990s saw greater regional economic integration. This included the establishment of the European Monetary Union with the Maastricht Treaty and the Single Market in Europe, both in 1992, and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) signed by the governments of Canada, Mexico and the United States, creating a trilateral trading bloc in 1994. With the fall of the in 1989, Eastern European economies entered the scene. Moreover, OECD membership, which had been stable at 24 since 1973, began to expand to include more countries in Asia, in Latin America and in Eastern Europe. emerged, attracting massive capital flows from OECD economies. These economies overheated and saw bubbles inflating, which eventually led to the Asian crisis in 1997, followed by the Russian default in 1998 triggered by a fall in oil prices exacerbating domestic vulnerabilities. would corrupt information technologies on which the economy had become more dependent – though it turned out to be a non-issue. Fiscal policy, notably in Europe, was too easy for the circumstances, but this was masked (and partly caused) by windfalls stemming from the sale of UMTS (access to third-generation mobile phone grids) licenses. Emerging market economies entering the picture (2000s until the crisis) Since the mid-1990s the world economy has become increasingly integrated, owing to the removal of trade barriers, the liberalisation of capital flows, the spread of new technologies and – last but not least – the fall of the Iron Curtain. World trade soared and cross-border flows grew from around 5% of world GDP in the mid-1990s to about 20% in 2007 – the year preceding the global financial and economic crisis. External assets and liabilities as a share of world GDP more than doubled over this period, from 150% to 350%. The case of China, now the second-largest economy in the world, deserves a separate mention. China’s accession to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in 2001 represented a milestone in its engagement with the world economy. China has been running large current account surpluses since ( ) while also attracting large inflows of foreign direct investment from the OECD area. Coupled with an exchange-rate policy of pegging the currency to the US dollar and strict capital controls on capital outflows, this led to the build-up of over $3 trillion worth of foreign exchange reserves – almost 50% of GDP and one third of the global total. The bulk of China’s official reserves have been invested in US Treasury bonds, allowing the United States to finance its large current account deficit at favourable terms and to keep its bond yields low. of persistently low bond yields in deficit countries such as the United States (Bernanke, 2005, Bernanke et al., In a context of malfunctioning financial markets (see below), this contributed to excessive risk taking and leveraging. Indeed, the repetition of bubbles and busts from the late 1980s until the early 2000s, such as the Savings and Loans, LTCM, Asian and dotcom crises, had not only macroeconomic origins, but was also associated with, partly misguided, financial innovation. Technological change allowed the development of new and ever more complex financial products. Weaknesses in supervision and regulation led to a neglect of the associated risks, especially when new products were hard to value properly and banks and corporations removed them from their balance sheet to so-called With hindsight the dotcom bust in 2000-01 should have been taken as a warning signal that systemic risk was unduly increasing. But this shock was again comfortably absorbed by a substantial easing of monetary policy, in part also in response to the 11 September terrorist attacks in 2001. Housing and mortgage markets then took over from the stock market as a main attractor of liquidity in search for yield. In this context, real estate prices skyrocketed across a wide range of OECD countries, which produced large wealth effects on consumption and investment. Sustained growth ensued while inflation remained low. As risk appetites recovered and then reached new heights, prices in stock and bond markets also surged. was seen to be best conducted by an operationally independent central bank, with price stability as a key objective – in practice typically defined as a low inflation rate of mostly around 2%. The main instrument used was the policy interest rate, accompanied by communication policies designed to ensure that policy actions became more predictable and better understood. Financial markets were viewed as efficient and forward-looking, allocating risks to those who could best bear them, so there would be no role for monetary policy to lean against asset price bubbles, even if these could be detected with any degree of confidence. was seen to foster long-term economic growth and improve labour market outcomes. In the 1990s a wide range of policies had been implemented to improve labour utilisation and labour productivity, including policies to improve human capital and innovation alongside the easing of product and labour market regulations (OECD, 2003 and 2006a). Attention was also paid to enhancing the resilience of economies, so as to allow them to bounce back more quickly from downturns, and the importance of competitive financial markets for promoting growth (OECD, 2006b). Monetary policy appeared to be generally successful in this period, with low and stable inflation and generally well-anchored inflation expectations. But it was not sufficiently recognised that this outcome was helped by globalisation, a positive aggregate supply shock that kept inflation low – at least until oil and commodity prices surged. Fiscal consolidation also looked successful, but – as has been a recurrent theme in the OECD’s economic history – failure to attain sound underlying public finances was masked by very favourable cyclical developments. Fiscal rules ( e.g.  Finally, the potential for systemic financial risks was not effectively monitored, such risks being viewed as low as long as stability-oriented macroeconomic policies were pursued and micro-prudential regulation was conducted effectively. Policy decisions failed to incorporate the implications of the rapid pro-cyclical growth in financial leverage and risk-taking, the concentration of risk, and the increasing potential for the cross-border and cross-market transmission of economic and financial shocks. Efforts by the Bank of International Settlements to set up capital adequacy ratios in Basel I and then revising them in Basel II obscured the risks that were building up in banks’ balance sheets. All this explains how problems in a small corner of US financial markets (subprime mortgages accounted for only 3% of US financial assets) could infect the entire global banking system and set off an explosive spiral of falling asset prices and bank losses in 2008 and 2009. Consumer and investment demand quickly started to fall in the United States. As the US financial crisis intensified, weakness spread globally. With wholesale money markets freezing up, companies started to liquidate inventories and in late 2008 world trade nose-dived. The sharpest contraction since the Great Depression of the 1930s unfolded. The final two sections of this chapter draw on Pain and Röhn (2011). The resolve of policymakers around the world, on display in particular at the London G20 summit in April 2009, contributed to prevent a second Great Depression. Massive fiscal and monetary policy stimulus was injected in most OECD and many non-OECD economies. As well, virtually all distressed systemically important financial institutions were rescued following the Lehman Brothers debacle, with central banks and governments providing ample liquidity and balance-sheet support. Many central banks resorted to non-conventional measures (large-scale intervention in capital markets so as to reduce the yields on longer maturities) alongside the provision of unlimited liquidity to the banking system. Changing the assignment of policy instruments to targets While macroeconomic expansion has been instrumental in containing the crisis, the depth of the recession and dysfunctional financial markets overwhelmed the capacity of traditional macroeconomic policy to inject sufficient stimulus. In addition to lowering policy interest rates to close to the zero lower bound and implementing traditional fiscal stimulus measures, many countries opted to use non-conventional policy measures to stimulate aggregate demand and give support to impaired banking systems in a synchronised fashion. Substantial efforts were made to support financial institutions including the provision of credit, funding guarantees and liquidity to the financial system, bank recapitalisation using public funds, deposit guarantee extensions and efforts to move troubled assets from banks’ balance sheets to newly created asset management companies. Concerning the emerging market economies, monetary and fiscal stimulus injected during the global crisis should be withdrawn to damp rising inflation pressures and to prevent the development of bubbles in asset and real estate markets. They should not resist currency appreciation where a stronger exchange rate would be in line with the economic fundamentals and necessary to rebalance economic activity towards domestic absorption. Structural policies, including policies to shift activity from the informal to the formal sector of the economy and financial market reforms, should aim to enhance productivity and to achieve more inclusive growth. The repetition of financial crises since the early-1990s should have served as warnings that inadequate regulation and weak financial supervision can be risky in a globalised world economy and financial system. But policymakers took the overall benign economic development as evidence that the dominant paradigm worked and this eventually led to the 2008-09 financial crisis. In a globalised economy and financial system, financial vulnerabilities have increased. Booms and busts tend to be recurrent and so are the associated rescues of financial institutions and sovereigns. This, in turn, gives rise to concerns over moral hazard and the political acceptance – if not the legitimacy – of the policy paradigm. growth across the globe. All strands of economic policy – prudential, fiscal, structural and monetary – have a role to play, each within their remits and proper assignments. And all of them need to be co-ordinated internationally so as to achieve that policies reinforce, rather than work against, each other. et al. While tighter capital adequacy rules may act as a constraint on lending, their adverse impact on growth is found to be rather limited (Slovik and Cournède, 2011). 2009). Specific tools that could be employed include contingent add-ons to the micro-prudential buffers as a function of aggregate borrowers’ leverage, and procedures for orderly resolution of cross-border financial institutions. Higher margin requirements, including limits to loan-to-value ratios in mortgage lending, could also be envisaged. In addition, stress tests of banks need to become more systemic, regular and harmonised across jurisdictions, and their results publicly available. This does not mean that credit and asset prices should be included as a formal objective of monetary policy alongside inflation (and resource utilisation). Doing so risks blurring the assignment of policy instruments to targets, thus complicating the communication and accountability of monetary policy. If bubbles can be identified, macro-prudential regulation and supervision (see above) offer better targeted tools to prevent them. Nonetheless, it might be argued that it is necessary for central banks to adopt a sufficiently long horizon over which to achieve price stability – and this would imply a concomitant need to incorporate financial stability considerations in their policy decisions. To date only the European Central Bank has formally incorporated financial variables in its framework, although it is unclear to what extent this has effectively driven its monetary policy decisions. The monetary pillar of the ECB's policy framework has been discussed extensively in the academic literature, see  For the automatic stabilisation argument of price level targeting, see Eggertson and Woodford (2003), Ambler (2009) and Cournède and Moccero (2009). This mechanism would fail though if inflation expectations are adaptive rather forward looking (Murray, 2010). There are also many practical implementation and communication problems (Goodhart, 2005; Edey, 2008; Bean Finally, an open question is to what extent macro-prudential and monetary policies need to be co-ordinated since macro-prudential policies will affect the monetary transmission mechanism (especially through the credit channel). Combining both types of policy in a single institution could facilitate such co-ordination, but having separate authorities – each with its area of responsibility and instruments – would offer greater accountability. If the latter set-up were to emerge as the preferred one, an explicit co-ordination mechanism between the two institutions would be needed to indentify the build-up of systemic risks and decide the best response to them. e.g.  Recent work by the OECD shows possible ways to adjust the budget balances for asset-price cycles and to address other sources of uncertainty of the underlying fiscal position. Price and Dang (2011) compare the traditional and a new asset-price adjusted structural balance. In the run-up to the financial crisis the asset-adjusted deficit (as a share of GDP) was between 1½ and 2 percentage points higher than the tradition measure in several OECD countries. Calculations in OECD (2010b) suggest that a 1 percentage point improvement in the employment rate improve government balances by between 0.3-0.8% of GDP. Product‑market reforms that enhance productivity also have the potential to raise tax revenues, although they also tend to spill over in higher public-sector wages and transfers, thus offsetting some of this favourable fiscal effect. Finally, structural reforms have a key role in addressing the underlying determinants of global imbalances through their impact on consumption, saving and investment (OECD, 2011). Developing social welfare systems in China and other Asian economies would fulfil important social goals, and as a side‑effect would reduce the need for precautionary saving, thus curbing the large current account surpluses of some of these countries. Product market reforms in services industries could encourage capital spending and thereby reduce current account surpluses in countries such as Japan and Germany. Removal of policy distortions that encourage consumption, such as tax deductibility of interest payments on mortgages, could help increase household saving and reduce the current account deficit in a number of countries, not least the United States. Financial market reforms could relax borrowing constraints in emerging economies and thereby boost consumption and investment and curb their current account surpluses, but should be accompanied by appropriate prudential controls. , reckless risk-taking and sudden stops or reversals. To smoothly channel and absorb capital inflows, emerging market economies should aim to have the appropriate mix of macroeconomic policies in place (move towards sustainable fiscal policy where this is not yet the case and not resist appreciation of their exchange rate) and strengthen macro-prudential frameworks to further contain the risk of financial instability. Capital restrictions should be a last resort and undertaken in a transparent manner and subject to international discussion. A framework for common principles underlying capital account policies could facilitate and enhance stability while guaranteeing open capital markets. Finally, the OECD has identified a possible role for structural policies to attenuate the financial stability risks associated with capital inflows – by influencing their composition towards more stable and productive forms of financing such as foreign direct investment (see 