 was launched in 2005 as a new form of structural surveillance complementing the OECD’s long-standing country and sector-specific surveys. In line with the OECD’s 1960 founding Convention, the aim is to help promote vigorous sustainable economic growth and improve the well-being of OECD citizens. This surveillance is based on a systematic and in-depth analysis of structural policies and their outcomes across OECD members, relying on a set of internationally comparable and regularly updated policy indicators with a well-established link to performance. Using these indicators, alongside the expertise of OECD committees and staff, policy priorities and recommendations are derived for each member and, since the 2011 issue, six key non-member economies with which the OECD works closely (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and South Africa). From one issue to the next, Underpinning this type of benchmarking is the observation that drawing lessons from mutual success and failure is a powerful avenue for progress. While allowance should be made for genuine differences in social preferences across OECD members, the uniqueness of national circumstances should not serve to justify inefficient policies. In gauging performance, the focus is on GDP per capita, productivity and employment. As highlighted in the past and again in this issue, this leaves out some important dimensions of well-being. For this reason,   More than six years after the onset of the financial and economic crisis, a return to the pre-crisis growth path remains elusive for a majority of OECD countries. In most advanced economies, potential growth has been revised down and, in some cases, there are growing concerns that persistently weak demand is pulling potential growth down further, resulting in a protracted period of stagnation. Risks of persistent stagnation concern mainly the euro area and Japan, but many of the underlying challenges such as slowing productivity, high long-term unemployment and falling labour force participation are common to other advanced economies. In major emerging-market economies, growth has become far less impressive in the last year or two, owing to a varying extent to infrastructure bottlenecks, financial sector vulnerabilities and resource misallocation. The slowdown has been particularly sharp in countries most exposed to commodity price developments. Restoring healthy growth, while ensuring that the gains are broadly shared, requires determined and systematic actions across a broad range of policy areas. In this context, the slowdown in the pace of structural reforms observed across a majority of OECD countries over the past two years and documented in this report does not augur well. Where the reform slowdown reflects the need for governments to focus on effective implementation following a period of intense reform activity – as may be the case in most peripheral euro area countries – this needs not necessarily be as big a concern, as long as the pace remains elevated. The success of reforms also requires that time and efforts be devoted to approving follow-up legislation and ensuring full implementation by lower-level jurisdictions. These are legitimate concerns. In some of the countries hardest-hit by the crisis, substantial labour market reforms aimed at restoring competitiveness have been introduced without commensurate and parallel efforts in product markets and without the availability of fiscal resources to cushion the social impact. The result has been severe job and income losses, hurting young people the most. More broadly, there are indications that the most vulnerable households have been losing ground since the crisis across a majority of OECD countries. provides a broad set of recommendations to improve firms’ incentives to invest in new markets and technologies. Chief among them is the reduction in regulatory barriers to competition, both to facilitate business start-ups and encourage incumbents to pursue innovation as a means to keep the competitive edge. Investment in R&amp;D and other forms of knowledge-based capital – fundamental to bring new technologies and products to the market – continues to be hampered in many countries by various legal and administrative obstacles to the setting-up and expansion of new firms as well as by barriers to the reallocation of labour and capital resources both within and across firms. Priorities in this area include reforms of labour market regulations, housing market policies and bankruptcy legislation, with a view to encourage entrepreneurship and mobility. In emerging-market economies, priorities also include reforms of the financial sector or the judiciary system to strengthen the rule of law (Brazil, China, Mexico, India, Indonesia and the Russian Federation). Innovation and global market integration are key drivers of productivity gains and should be strongly encouraged. However, measures are also needed to ensure that the gains are broadly shared. Past experience indicates that faster technological development and diffusion may well further increase the dispersion of wages by raising the demand for high‑skill workers. In the medium term, such risk is best mitigated through education and skills development. Reforms in these areas are viewed as a priority in a vast majority of advanced and emerging-market economies. The report contains specific recommendations to broaden access to higher education, including vocational education, as well as to improve opportunities for training and up-skilling throughout the working life. In most emerging-market economies, as well as in Australia, France, Germany and the United States, providing a broader and more equal access to quality education at the primary and secondary levels is also a priority. In the nearer term, rising inequalities and the social consequences of the crisis call for policy packages that can stimulate growth, reduce income dispersion and promote inclusion. Reconciling these objectives is challenging but in countries facing high long-term unemployment rates it can be achieved with measures that improve job opportunities and the earnings potential of low-skilled workers. For many European countries, reducing labour tax wedges to boost job creation and reforming active labour market policies to help matching workers with jobs are key policy priorities. Such reforms can be funded by shifting taxation towards indirect sources such as consumption or – preferably from an equity or environmental perspective – immovable property, inheritance and green taxes. In countries such as Germany, Japan and Korea, further reforms of the tax and transfer systems, including childcare services, would help support growth by bringing more women in the labour market. Narrowing the gap in the degree of job protection between different types of contracts would facilitate their full integration within firms and improve their career prospects. Reforms of job protection legislation combined with extensions of social protection are also a priority in several emerging-market economies so as to shift protection from jobs to workers and thereby reduce informality. Czech Republic United Kingdom New Zealand Russian Federation United States EU refers to the average of 21 European Union members of the OECD. The financial crisis and continued subdued recovery have resulted in lower growth potential for most advanced countries, while many emerging-market economies are facing a slowdown. In the near term, policy challenges include persistently high unemployment, slowing productivity, high public-sector budget deficit and debt, as well as remaining fragilities in the financial sector. The crisis has also increased social distress, as lower‑income households were hit hard, with young people suffering the most severe income losses and facing increasing poverty risk. Longer-term challenges include coping with population ageing as well as with the effect of skill-biased technical change on income inequality and the impact of environmental degradation on health and future growth. Robust structural policies are needed to address many of the short- and medium-term challenges faced by both advanced and emerging-market countries. offers a comprehensive assessment to help governments reflect on how policy reforms might affect their citizens’ wellbeing and to design policy packages that best meet their objectives. The report identifies key reform priorities to boost real incomes and employment in advanced and major emerging-market countries. The priorities broadly cover product and labour market regulation, education and training, tax and benefit systems, trade and investment rules, and innovation policies. The framework has been instrumental in helping G20 countries to develop growth strategies to raise their combined gross domestic product (GDP) by 2%, one of the main policy objectives set by the G20 in 2014 to achieve sustained and balanced growth. includes a special chapter reviewing broad trends in structural reforms since the early 2000s. Progress on structural reform since 2013 Growth can be made more inclusive by removing obstacles to higher employment and labour market participation of underrepresented groups such as women, youth, low‑skilled and older workers. Encouraging faster reallocation to new jobs and ensuring that workers can up-grade skills would further boost employment and promote inclusion. Other policies that promote labour force participation and job creation also widen the wage dispersion. However, because they contribute to raising employment – not least among lower-skilled workers – such reforms have a neutral effect on the dispersion of households’ disposable income. Reform trends since 2005 in 2005, the pace of structural reforms has remained roughly constant on average across OECD countries, with the exception of a notable acceleration in the aftermath of the crisis. Overall, structural reforms implemented since the early 2000s have contributed to raising the level of potential GDP per capita by around 5% on average across countries, with most of the gains coming from higher productivity. Further reform towards current best practice could raise the long-term level of GDP per capita by up to 10% on average across OECD countries. This is equivalent to an average gain of around USD 3 000 per person. Taking stock of reform action and identifying priorities in 2015 policy recommendations since 2013. Against this background, it identifies and discusses new priority areas where structural reforms are needed to lift growth across OECD and partner countries. For many countries, this slowdown could be attributed to adverse cyclical conditions amid constrained fiscal and monetary policies, which are weighing on governments’ capacity to promote and sustain the reform agenda, as well as to the need to ensure that past legislated reforms are implemented. Structural reforms are needed to address many of the short and medium-term challenges faced by both advanced and emerging-market countries. More than six years after the onset of the financial and economic crisis, the world economy is still weak. The great recession has dented potential output of most advanced countries, while most emerging-market economies are currently facing a slowdown. In the near term, policy challenges include persistently high unemployment, slowing productivity, high public‑sector budget deficit and debt, as well as remaining fragilities in the financial sector and household balance sheets. In addition, the crisis has increased social distress, as lower-income households were hit hard, with young people suffering the most severe income losses and therefore face increasing poverty risk. Addressing rising hardship is challenging in a context where the pursuit of public finance consolidation objectives in many countries puts pressures on traditional redistributive tools. Looking further ahead, underlying global trends that pre‑dated the crisis pose formidable challenges, as discussed in the . These include the effect of population ageing on the level and sources of growth in gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, as well as the effect of the continuation of skill‑biased technical change on income inequalities and the economic impact of environmental degradation (OECD, 2014a). analysis identifies five areas of structural reform priorities to boost growth and real income for each OECD country, for the European Union as a whole, and for the BRIICS – Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and South Africa. Two additional emerging-market countries are covered for the first time in the 2015 edition: Colombia and Latvia, which have started a process of accession to the OECD. See the OECD Initiative on Inclusive Growth, a project which seeks to better identify and understand policies that can deliver improvements in aspects of living standards that aside from income and its distribution matter for people’s quality of life (e.g. health, jobs, skills, and the environment). It contributes to the OECD initiative on (NAEC), an organisation-wide reflection exercise launched at the 2012 OECD Ministerial Council Meeting (MCM) to bring continuous improvements to the organisation’s analytical frameworks and advice ( includes a special chapter reviewing trends in structural reforms since the early 2000s, including actions taken in areas beyond those directly covered by ). The current chapter focuses on the recent period and priority areas. It first provides a broad assessment of the progress that countries have made in structural reform priorities identified in the 2013 issue of Progress on reform priorities since 2013 . An attempt is made to maximise timeliness in the assessment of reform responsiveness. This chapter covers actions taken until the end of 2014. The reform responsiveness indicator is a measure of the extent to which OECD countries have followed up on per se The reform responsiveness rate indicator is based on a scoring system in which recommendations set in the 2013 issue of take a value of one if Given that a single priority may entail more than one specific recommendation, the scoring is often based on more than one reform opportunity per priority area. For example, in the area of product market regulation, priorities can cover both economy-wide barriers to competition (e.g. excessive or non-transparent administrative burdens) as well as industry-specific barriers (e.g. weak competition in retail trade); in turn, such priorities can cover different industries (e.g. retail trade and electricity). Changes may concern one or several aspects of regulation. This is reflected in the scoring system rate by assessing reform responsiveness at the lower and more detailed level of specific recommendations (corresponding to reform opportunities) within each priority. The following section focuses on actions taken on 2013 recommendations. Hence, it covers two years (2013 and 2014). It also offers a partial comparison with the previous period, i.e. reform responsiveness over the period 2011-12. Reform responsiveness cannot be assessed for Colombia and Latvia, because priorities are being identified in 2015 for the first time for those countries. For more details see Box 2.2 and Annex 2.A1 OECD (2010a). Reform progress across OECD countries and the BRIICS A similar picture emerges from a survey carried out by the Business and Industry Advisory Committee to the OECD (BIAC) in its Member and Observer organisations – i.e. the major national business and employer organisations in OECD countries and a few major non-OECD economies. National business and employer organisations participated from 23 respondent countries: Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, the Russian Federation, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. As of February 2014, BIAC Member/Observer organisations perceive a significant shortfall in countries’ implementation of 2013 Following some acceleration in the aftermath of the crisis, OECD countries are showing signs of reform slowdown. Going for Growth – Interim Report published in 2014 (OECD, 2014b). This is also in line with recent findings for EU countries, as reported in a detailed survey of structural reforms in the EU over the period 2008-14 (European Commission, 2014a). ). Reforms have been slowing in the majority of countries in 2013-14 ( , Panel A). This follows a period of intense legislative activity in the aftermath of the crisis, partly driven by financial market pressures in the context of the euro area debt turmoil (OECD, 2012a, 2013a). Indeed, the slowdown is most pronounced in those countries that exhibited highest levels and acceleration in reform responsiveness between 2009 and 2012, notably euro area periphery countries ( , Panels B and C). The pace of reform remains strong at the EU level and, even more so, in Mexico, while it is strengthening in Japan following the launch of the structural component of the unveiled in June 2013. Acceleration is taking place in the Netherlands and, to a lesser extent, Norway, which in earlier periods had shown little reform action. Amid a general slowdown, the most and least active reformers across the OECD are generally the same countries in 2013-14 as in 2011-12, albeit with a narrowing of the gap between the two groups ( , Panel A). In other words, the pace of reforms is declining among the most active reformers and increasing somewhat among some of the least active recent reformers. Fiscal consolidation imperatives may be weighing on the structural reform agenda of many countries, in particular in the European Union (European Commission, 2014a). For example, budgetary imperatives constraint the pursuit of tax reductions and tax shifting reforms, and also the capacity to compensate potential losers from reforms. However, fiscal consolidation and structural reforms objectives should not be traded against each other and can be pursued simultaneously. Many reforms achieve both goals because they strengthen public budgets, either directly or indirectly, via higher output and employment. See Chapter 2 of Going for Growth 2013 Concerns associated with possible adverse effects of structural reforms under current cyclical conditions may also contribute to the reform slowdown. One concern is that GDP gains may take time to materialise or be preceded by short-term losses given wide aggregate demand shortages and deflation risks amid constrained macroeconomic policies and impaired fiscal positions in many countries, especially in the euro area. One particular risk is that pro-competition reforms may become counter-productive, namely contractionary, in the short to medium-term if monetary policy is constrained at the zero lower bound (ZLB) and, hence, unable to accommodate supply expansion by the standard means lowering policy rates (Eggertsson et al., 2014). However, previous model and evidence‑based analysis on the short-term impact of structural reforms suggests that such concerns could be exaggerated and delivers lessons to bring forward reform-driven gains (OECD, 2012a): Going for Growth 2012 (OECD, 2012a) for an assessment, based on detailed findings in Bouis et al. (2012). This assessment was confirmed recently by analysis conducted on the basis of a 2-sector multi-region (reforming euro area region, rest of euro area, rest of world) macroeconomic model (Vogel, 2014). The European Commission model (QUEST) is used to analyse the impact of structural reforms on economic activity in a macroeconomic environment in which the zero-bound constraint on monetary policy rates is temporarily binding. The simulations suggest that the short-term output response to reforms can indeed be negative, but such negative effects are, however, small and rather short-lived in the model. However, in a few cases, growth benefits may take more time to materialise in a downturn, and long-term growth gains can be preceded by short-run losses. For example, in a context of severe labour market slack, social protection reforms aimed at encouraging jobseekers’ return to work through a tightening of conditions for receiving unemployment benefits can temporarily depress employment. Postponing such reforms until the labour market shows clear signs of recovery is legitimate in economies still facing weak demand. Recent EU reports provide a detailed survey of reform action in the European Union. First, European Commission (2014a) delivers a detailed review of structural reforms across all policy areas over the period 2008-14. Second, European Commission (2014b) focuses on product market reforms initiated over the last years in Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece. Such report describes the reform process and presents a number of relevant monitoring indicators on the take-up of product market reforms, with a view to assessing reform implementation and short-term effectiveness. For evidence and discussion on recent implementation issues in euro area periphery, see e.g.  (OECD, 2014c). See discussion on take-up and implementation issues in the area of product market reforms in recent a EU-led survey (European Commission, 2014b). See also Brandolini (2014) for a focus on recent Italian data pointing to alarming increases since 2007 in both relative and absolute poverty. on average across the OECD, the income of the bottom 10% of the population declined by 1.6% per year between 2007 and 2011. The drop has been twice as large as the decline observed for the top 10% over the same period. Young people have been suffering the most severe income losses, which has increased their poverty risk. Large increases in disposable income inequality and poverty occurred in those countries hit hardest by the crisis: Greece, Iceland, Ireland and Spain, in a context where fiscal consolidation imperatives have constrained the use of taxes and transfers to protect vulnerable households from hardship. Large increases in disposable income inequality since 2007 have also been taking place in France, Hungary and the Slovak Republic. Large increases in poverty since 2007 have also been taking place in Mexico and Turkey. See OECD (2014d) for details. in this report and Causa et al. (2014). The reform agenda will have to be pursued with a view to improve people’s material living standards and promote inclusive growth. Reforms that boost productivity should translate into higher wages, while reforms to boost employment should facilitate the integration in the labour force of those systematically left out. Making reform happen may require overcoming deeply-rooted political economy obstacles, but analysis of major past reform experiences has helped identify the main ingredients for success ( provides countries with recommendations about the structural reforms that they should consider implementing. However, the business of actually carrying out reform is complex, and involves a wide range of general political economy and more country-specific considerations. OECD analysis has examined the political economy of reform in 20 country-specific case studies of reform episodes in ten OECD countries as well as thematic treatments of the conditions that can make actual reform possible (see OECD, 2010b). This work builds on earlier OECD work, including a chapter in the 2007 edition of status quo Successful structural reforms take time to implement. The more successful reforms in the case studies generally took over two years to prepare and adopt – and this does not include the preparation work done in the many reform episodes in which problems and proposals had been debated and studied for years before the authorities set to work framing specific reforms. Government cohesion is important. If the government undertaking a reform initiative is not united around the policy, it will send out mixed messages, and opponents will exploit its divisions; defeat is usually the result. The case studies suggest that cohesion matters more than such factors as the strength or unity of opposition parties or the government’s parliamentary strength. Government leadership is essential. Reform progress may sometimes be facilitated by intensive discussions involving the government and the social partners (i.e. unions and business groups) in a formalised process. However, firmness of purpose on the part of the government also seems to be a critical element of success in such situations, though this is unlikely to succeed unless the government is in a position to reward co-operation by the social partners or can make a credible threat to proceed unilaterally if a concerted approach fails. status quo through smaller piece‑meal reforms or reform attempts; where the existing arrangements are well institutionalised and popular, there appears to be no danger of imminent breakdown, reform is far more difficult. status quo Even if at a slower pace, the reform agenda has nevertheless been pursued in Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain in 2013-14 ( ). In France, reform responsiveness has been somewhat lower, close to the OECD average for 2013-14, and has not improved from the previous period: priority must be given to implement recently-legislated reforms and pursue announced plans aimed at restoring competitiveness and tackling unemployment, notably by promoting a jobs-rich recovery. Italy’s reform efforts have been slowing down compared to the 2011-12 period and are therefore lagging behind compared with the other euro area periphery countries. However, the government has recently completed the initial steps in its comprehensive structural reform programme. Pursuing this programme with determination, along with effectively implementing earlier reforms, should help achieve stronger and more inclusive growth. The reform slowdown observed for many advanced countries coincides with some reform acceleration for emerging-market countries, Mexico – as mentioned above – and the BRIICS ( ). Levels of reform responsiveness in all BRIICS countries are higher than the OECD average and – except for Brazil – increasing ( recommendations, a reflection of ambitious reforms by these countries’ governments. The pace of reforms is comparatively lower but has accelerated in Indonesia. In contrast with other emerging-market countries though, Chile and Turkey have decelerated the pace of reform efforts. Reform acceleration since 2011 in emerging-market countries may have been catalysed by a growing awareness of the bottlenecks and constraints to potential output growth. This may have been spurred also by concerns associated with recent macroeconomic developments which revealed their vulnerability to commodity prices and capital flow fluctuations. Among labour productivity-enhancing areas, OECD countries have been most active at reforming education and innovation policies ( ). This is a welcome step, since long‑term growth will increasingly depend on multifactor productivity, hence on the accumulation of skills and knowledge-based capital. In many countries such as Estonia, the Slovak Republic and the United Kingdom, priority has been given to improving the school-to-job transition and reducing the shares of young persons who are not in employment, education or training (so-called ). This has been addressed by expanding vocational education (including workplace training) to raise employability and enhance the alignment between skills and labour market needs. In the area of innovation, priority has been given to increasing the cost-effectiveness of public spending on R&amp;D and therefore encouraging innovation by the private sector. Associated reforms, for instance as pursued in the Czech Republic, have focused on enhancing the efficiency of R&amp;D tax credits and strengthening the co-operation between firms and higher education institutions. Among policy areas to enhance labour utilisation, OECD countries have given priority to ALMPs. High responsiveness in the area of ALMPs reflects the need to address the sharp increase in unemployment following the crisis and in particular the share of long-term unemployed. The labour market deterioration has spurred policy efforts to develop better‑designed and more cost-effective counselling and training services helping the unemployed to look for vacancies matching their skills, and if needed, to requalify. ALMPs were relatively under-developed in some of the countries that experienced the sharpest increases in long-term unemployment, such as Greece, Spain and the United States. In these countries, priority has been given to the progressive development of counselling and training services. The focus has been on improving targeting, notably through systematic use of profiling by public employment services (PES) and cost-effectiveness, including via a careful involvement of private providers in delivering job-search assistance. The use of private providers in delivering job-search assistance might not always be more cost‑effective than the use of public providers and might lead to Wage bargaining reforms and, more generally, reforms to increase wage flexibility and responsiveness to economic conditions, have been rare in the last two years across the OECD. This stands in contrast with the high reform responsiveness recorded in 2011 and 2012. Indeed, the current slowdown can be explained by the introduction of major reforms in these areas in the post-crisis context, especially in Greece, Portugal and Spain (OECD, 2013a). These countries should now ensure full implementation of legislated changes, and, going forward, pursue reform efforts. Reform intensity has also been low in the area of unemployment benefit systems (UB), as it was in the previous period. Considering the weakness of the labour market recovery after the crisis in a number of countries, governments have put priority on protecting the incomes of the unemployed in a context where job opportunities remain low. Indeed, the only OECD countries taking significant action in this area are to be found among those which were recommended to increase the coverage or generosity of unemployment benefits (and social protection more broadly). Reforms along this line have been implemented for instance in Japan and Korea. By contrast, recommendations to taper UB by duration or to eliminate the age bias (favouring older jobseekers) in UB generosity have been rarely followed-up. As economic activity and labour demand pick up, more emphasis should be put on promoting job search and the return to work. In this respect, some countries need to tighten the conditions to continue receiving benefits as the unemployment spell gets longer. Tax policy is another area where the pace of reforms has slowed. Indeed, in the 2011‑12 period, many OECD countries increased consumption taxes, while in some cases lowering labour taxes, in line with See Cournede et al. (2013) for an assessment of the choice of consolidation instruments against the adverse side-effects of fiscal adjustment on other policy objectives. Fiscal consolidation instruments are analysed for the likely severity of their side effects on growth and the income distribution. Raising revenues by stepping up consumption taxes may raise disposable income inequality because such taxes fall more heavily on lower-income households. This is especially true for labour utilisation-enhancing priorities since the majority of recommendations are aimed at reducing those countries’ large labour productivity gaps (see next section). As a result, Bearing this caveat in mind, among labour productivity-enhancing priorities, BRIICS countries have been most active in financial market and banking reforms to encourage efficiency in capital allocation. India has been taking steps to ease barriers to domestic and foreign competition in the banking sector and China to reduce government control of interest rate setting. Among the less frequently recommended labour utilisation-enhancing priorities, progress has been achieved in the area of active labour market policies and social protection, in contrast with the previous period. In particular, South Africa is signalling reform efforts to tackle its extremely high level of youth unemployment by establishing public employment services and wage subsidies targeted at young jobseekers. No progress has been achieved in job protection and labour market regulations. The absence of significant reforms in these areas was also observed in the previous period, perhaps an indication of the fierce political-economy obstacles. Yet easing stringent labour market regulations in emerging-market countries would raise formal employment. Reforms in this area would also encourage efficiency in labour allocation and thereby productivity growth. This section summarises the 2015 priorities for OECD and partner countries. The identification of such priorities is based on a combination of quantitative analysis, i.e. the mapping of performance and policy weaknesses, and country-specific expertise. The methodology is described in See also Annex 1.A1 of OECD (2013a). ). The section begins with a brief overview of how countries rank in terms of GDP per capita and to what extent the differences in living standards can be attributed to gaps in productivity or labour utilisation. This is followed by a brief snapshot of changes in policy priorities from 2013 to 2015. The final section discusses in more details the policy priorities to enhance labour utilisation, and then those aimed at boosting labour productivity. Priorities aimed at improving labour productivity include: enhancing equity and efficiency of education systems; encouraging innovation, the diffusion of technology and of new ideas; improving the competitive environment and resource allocation by e.g. easing entry restrictions for domestic and foreign firms, controls over business operations and cutting agricultural support; enhancing the efficiency of the tax system and of public expenditure; and addressing physical and legal infrastructure bottlenecks. Priorities aimed at improving labour utilisation include: reforming tax and benefits systems to make work pay, especially for population groups with weak labour market attachment, such as women, the low-skilled and older workers; improving the design and integration of social benefits and ALMPs; reviewing job protection legislation to enhance labour reallocation and tackle labour market duality and encouraging wage flexibility by reforms in minimum wage or bargaining systems. the average of the upper half of OECD countries is largely accounted for by labour productivity. These countries are in many ways quite heterogeneous, but most of them face the common challenges of tackling widespread informality and addressing bottlenecks in physical and legal infrastructure. A. OECD countries, 2013 Compared to the simple average of the 17 OECD countries with highest GDP per capita in 2013 based on 2013 purchasing power parities (PPPs). The sum of the percentage difference in labour resource utilisation and labour productivity do not add up exactly to the GDP per capita difference since the decomposition is multiplicative. Average of European Union countries in the OECD. Employment rate is measured as total number of employed divided by working-age population. Hours worked are measured as total number of hours worked per employed. Working-age population is measured as working-age population divided by total population. The total of the three components is not equal to labour resource utilisation as presented in Panel B since the decomposition is multiplicative. Economic Outlook 96 Databases B. Non-OECD countries, 2013 Compared to the simple average of the 17 OECD countries with highest GDP per capita in 2013 based on 2013 purchasing power parities (PPPs). The sum of the percentage difference in labour resource utilisation and labour productivity do not add up exactly to the GDP per capita difference since the decomposition is multiplicative. for employment data on Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia and Latvia; Statistics South Africa for employment data on South Africa; India National Sample Survey (various years), annual population estimates from the Registrar General and OECD estimates for employment data on India; China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security for employment data on China. the average of the upper half of OECD countries is more mixed for higher-income countries. Some of them can be grouped together and this assessment informs the selection of Many Northern European countries (e.g. Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany and the Netherlands) feature low labour utilisation and high productivity. Low labour utilisation is mainly driven in the majority of these countries by low hours worked among the employed, although Belgium and France are characterised by both low employment and low hours worked (see , Panel C). Low hours worked often reflect policy impediments to full time work, especially for second earners and lone parents – in general women. These impediments are often embedded in tax and benefit systems (e.g. some features associated with joint income taxation or with the withdrawal benefits as hours worked increase). , Panel C). By contrast with the previous group, all these countries are characterised by low employment but high hours worked among the employed. In most cases, some population groups – in general the low-skilled and youth – are largely excluded from the labour market, a diagnosis that applies to France as well. This can be attributed to policy impediments such as, for example, highly unbalanced employment protection legislation that creates labour market duality: that is, a divide between workers under contracts with strong job protection and those under contracts with little protection and little scope for on-the-job training. Countries outside Europe (e.g. Australia, Canada, Japan, Korea and New Zealand) feature high labour utilisation and low productivity. The drivers of low labour productivity are more difficult to identify and measure than those of low labour utilisation. In the case of Japan and Korea, relatively weak performance in services industries seems to constrain productivity growth; in the case of Canada and New Zealand, productivity gains appears to be held back by low returns to investment in knowledge-based capital and tertiary education. This can again be attributed to policy impediments, such as ineffective government support to innovation or barriers to the entry of firms and to the efficient allocation of capital and labour resources across firms and industries. by subject area has remained quite stable for OECD countries since 2013 ( priorities include: i) overall, higher prevalence of labour utilisation-enhancing priorities according to OECD analysis, while businesses’ priorities are largely oriented towards boosting productivity; ii) among labour-utilisation enhancing priorities, stronger emphasis on wage formation and minimum wage priorities according to businesses’ views and on job protection priorities according to OECD analysis; and iii) among labour-productivity enhancing priorities, stronger emphasis on public sector efficiency and infrastructure priorities according to businesses’ views and on human capital and agricultural support priorities according to OECD analysis. The vast majority of 2013 country-specific priorities are retained. Over the last two years, performance challenges have not changed much and policy reforms to address those challenges have been moderate, as discussed before. In many reform areas, progress remains piecemeal and much more is needed. Some reforms have been taking place only gradually, with incremental policy changes introduced in sequential rounds. This is typically the case for product market reforms, because countries need to address several policy distortions (such as broad competition versus industry-specific issues – eventually in multiple sectors) which are difficult to tackle simultaneously, not least reflecting political economy obstacles. Tax system with emphasis on the level of labour tax wedges Policy barriers to full-time female labour force participation Housing policies/barriers to geographical labour mobility Non-OECD refers to BRIICS countries plus Colombia and Latvia for 2015 and BRIICS countries for 2013 The sum of upper-income and lower-income OECD countries’ priorities for doesn’t add up to 175 because the EU as a whole is not counted among any of these two groups. action on policy recommendations (as defined and reflected in the reform responsiveness rate indicator presented above) has not implied the removal of the corresponding priority. While broad priority areas are retained for most countries, the more detailed mix and nature of policy recommendations underpinning each priority is reassessed and, when relevant, refocused. Such reassessment is established on the basis of shifting contexts and actions taken in the past two years. A refocusing of priorities is most frequent in the area of labour utilisation, because associated reforms may produce their effects relatively quickly, underscoring frequent revisions. This is typically the case of active labour market policies and unemployment benefit priorities, for which the frequency of refocusing is the highest (25% of the priorities in these areas have been refocused). In most cases as discussed in the previous section, efforts have been pursued in reforming public employment services and training for the unemployed while less has been achieved in reforming unemployment benefits. Some refocusing of priorities is also relatively frequent in the area of product markets (14%), reflecting in this case the piecemeal nature of the reforms. By contrast, education priorities have been rarely refocused (4%), because reforms in this area require sustained policy efforts to produce their effects. For non-OECD countries, For the purpose of this section, non-OECD countries include the BRIICS as well as Colombia and Latvia. 80% of policy priorities are aimed at improving productivity, reflecting these countries’ relative weakness in this area ( , Panel B). There is a strong focus on product market regulation – which is often much more stringent than in upper‑income OECD countries – and education systems, where quality and equity are relatively low. Addressing infrastructure bottlenecks and strengthening institutions to fight corruption are also recurrent recommendations for durably boosting productivity in these countries. Many priorities are intended to address labour informality. These include increasing the coverage of social protection systems, containing labour costs and relaxing overly strict job protection for workers in formal jobs. The distribution of priorities has remained remarkably stable for the BRIICS in spite of the recent acceleration in the pace of reforms. This is not surprising given the prevalence of productivity-enhancing policy reforms which take more time to produce their effects. The magnitude of performance and policy gaps with respect to OECD countries also implies that comparatively stronger action, probably staggered over an extended period of time, is needed for a policy priority to be fully addressed. priorities are the object of reform commitments made by G20 country governments to meet the additional 2% growth target set in the context of the Brisbane Action Plan in November 2014 (see priorities and the G20 Brisbane Action Plan commitment to raise GDP by 2% by 2018 The G20 made a commitment in the November 2014 Brisbane Action Plan to implement new policy measures to lift, by 2018, its collective GDP by more than 2% above the trajectory projected in the October 2013 IMF . The OECD and IMF G20 concluded that – if fully implemented – the proposed reform measures can raise overall G20 GDP by 2% by 2018 (OECD and IMF, 2014). This would add more than USD 2 trillion of GDP to the world economy, roughly equivalent to the size of the Australian economy. ? A simple measure is the degree of overlap between the OECD priorities and G20 countries’ commitments (see figure below). In around half of the G20 countries and in the European Union, at least three of the five Going for Growth This analysis relies on Chapter 1 of OECD Employment Outlook 2014 The jobs situation has started to improve, but there is still a long way to go. For the OECD as a whole, the jobs recovery has only just begun: the OECD employment rate is currently 1.8 percentage points below its level at the start of the global financial crisis down from the 2.2 percentage points gap reached at the trough of the jobs recession. However, the picture differs significantly across countries. In most euro area countries as well as in Denmark, the employment rate is close to its lowest level since the start of the crisis and the jobs recovery has in many cases yet to begin. The employment rate is currently higher than at the start of the crisis in countries where the decline in employment following the recession has been small (e.g. Austria and Germany). Employment rates have recovered modestly but tend to remain close to their cyclical trough in the remainder of OECD countries, including Japan and the United States. Labour markets have been relatively resilient in emerging-market countries, reflecting the milder effect of the global crisis. Still, the recent growth slowdown in some of them may not bode well for short-term labour market developments, for example if it spurs an increase in informality. Fostering job creation in the formal sector can help maintain growth rates that are sufficiently robust to continue narrowing the income gaps The OECD-wide unemployment rate has started to fall, according to the most recent data. In particular, unemployment rates in countries most severely affected by the euro area crisis as well as in the United States are now considerably below their cyclical peaks. The more vigorous improvement in unemployment relative to employment reflects the decline in labour force participation observed in a number of OECD countries, such as Denmark, Ireland, Portugal and the United States. The extent to which this decline reflects cyclical as opposed to secular factors already at work before the crisis (such as the gradual rise in school enrolment) has been intensively analysed and debated in the case of the United States. Attempts to provide a quantified assessment are clouded by the considerable uncertainty that remains regarding the amount of labour market slack. Long-term unemployment has increased substantially in countries that were initially hard hit by the financial crisis, including in those where the pre-crisis incidence was relatively low before, such as Latvia, Spain and the United States ( ). In others, it remains persistently high though closer to the pre-crisis levels (the Slovak Republic and South Africa) or even below (Germany). Tackling either the sharp rise in or the high level of long-term unemployment (or both as in the case of Greece, Ireland, Italy and Portugal) is therefore a pressing and widespread challenge across the OECD. Long-term unemployed (more than one year) as a percentage of total unemployment: Q4 2007 and Q3 2014 For OECD countries, data are smoothed using three-quarter moving averages. OECD is a weighted average excluding Chile. Data refer to 2013 for Israel, Q1 2014 for the Russian Federation. Data refer to Q1 2008 for South Africa. OECD calculations based on quarterly national Labour Force Surveys (cut-off date: 13 January 2015). Recent analysis indicates that some of the cyclical increase in unemployment has become structural in a number of OECD countries. Matching efficiency, i.e. the ease with which jobseekers find jobs and job vacancies are filled, may have deteriorated. Tentative evidence suggests that this may be the case in New Zealand and the United States, where the incidence of long-term unemployed has increased significantly since the crisis; however, this is difficult to establish empirically and results need to be taken with caution. Reduced matching efficiency may reflect the growing role of mismatch in terms of skills, industries and regions. It can, however, also reflect the possibility that some of the long‑term unemployed have become discouraged and are thus reducing their search intensity; and also, that they are being discriminated against by employers. reform recommendations can mitigate the potential long-term labour market effects of the crisis. Notably, a well-integrated system of passive (i.e. unemployment benefits) and active (i.e. job search support, counselling and training programmes) labour market policies can facilitate the return to work and improve the matching between workers and jobs. The share of population that is of working age has been falling in Japan since the late 1990s and is close to its peak in many other OECD countries. It is no longer increasing in China, contrasting with the expected continued rise in India, at least until 2050. Between 2010 and 2060, the OECD’s population is expected to increase by 17%, but the working-age population (aged 15-74 years) may fall by 7%, according to recent projections developed under the (OECD, 2014a). Even though further pension and labour market reforms may increase labour force participation rates in the OECD by a few percentage points, labour’s contribution to growth in GDP per capita is likely to be near zero throughout the period in the average OECD country. Economic Outlook 95 Long-term Database Tax system – levels of labour tax wedges High average and in particular marginal taxes on labour incomes tend to depress individuals’ labour supply by discouraging full-time labour force participation. In addition, high labour tax wedges can reduce firms’ labour demand by driving up the cost of labour (due to high employers’ contribution or payroll taxes). As a result, high labour tax wedges are associated with lower employment and hours worked as well as higher unemployment. Such detrimental effects are stronger for workers facing foremost labour demand-side obstacles, generally youth and the low-skilled, and those facing supply-side obstacles, generally second earners and lone parents. Too high and ill-designed social security provisions and tax wedges are also major drivers of labour informality, reflecting both labour demand and supply-side obstacles. ). Sometimes financial disincentives to take up work reflect the combined effect of taxes and benefits rather than only that of labour taxes – often in higher-income countries where welfare states are comparatively more developed. In such cases, reforms should focus on improving the design and articulation between taxes and benefits or on the use of earned income tax credits (EITC) with a view to achieving income redistribution without undermining work incentives.   Czech Republic European Union Tax system – levels of labour tax wedges and their interaction with transfers and benefits ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Remove tax and benefit disincentives to low earners full-time participation/introduce or expand EITC ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Policy barriers to full-time female participation – other than taxes and benefits ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa Tax system – levels of labour tax wedges and their interaction with transfers and benefits ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Remove tax and benefit disincentives to low earners full-time participation/introduce or expand EITC ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Policy barriers to full-time female participation – other than taxes and benefits ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ), a likely reflection of budgetary constraints. In order to avoid deterioration of budget positions, such recommendations are advocated as part of broader reforms to enhance the efficiency of tax systems (see detailed discussion in the productivity section below). These include measures such as: i) broadening the tax base, for instance by eliminating numerous tax exemptions; ii) combating tax evasion; iii) simplifying the tax code; and iv) shifting taxation towards less distortive sources of revenues, such as inheritance, immovable property, consumption and environmental tax bases, found to be less damaging to growth and welfare (Arnold et al., 2011). ). Recommendations are made to encourage female labour force participation or hours worked where those are particularly low and can be traced to ill-designed policies. This requires family-friendly policies and working conditions which enable fathers and mothers to balance their working hours and their family responsibilities and facilitate women’s participation in employment. The majority of policy recommendations fall in three main reform areas – with differential thrust reflecting country-specific context ( ): i) the level and design of taxes and benefits; for example fiscal disincentives to work for second earners such as tax allowances for non-working spouses (e.g. the Slovak Republic) and systems of joint taxation Recent work based on household data suggests that joint taxation of spouses discourages female labour supply (Kabatek et al., 2014). Switching to independent taxation affects spouses’ time allocation: in particular such reform increases the wife’s labour supply and reduces her housework. (e.g. Germany); ii) high costs, weak targeting and therefore limited access to childcare (e.g. Ireland); and iii) ill-designed parental leave policies or low take-up of parental leave arising from e.g. lack of flexibility in working-time arrangements such as underdeveloped part-time work (e.g. Korea). Such recommendations are in line with the wider OECD work on gender, such as stated by the OECD Council on Gender Equality in Education, Employment and Entrepreneurship (29 May 2013 – C/MIN(2013)5/FINAL – C/M(2013)12). Involuntary part-time workers are those working part-time either because they cannot find a full-time job or because they cannot work more hours in their current job. In most countries part-timers are those working less than 30 hours a week, except for Japan (less than 34 hours a week). 2012 data for Japan. The goal of UB, social protection and ALMPs is to provide adequate income support during jobless spells while encouraging the return to work with a view to efficiently matching workers and jobs. This implies associating counselling with training services. The main challenge consists in designing social protection systems that minimise trade-offs between financial sustainability, adequacy and efficiency (Fall et al., 2014). At the current juncture, a large number of countries need to address the rise in long-term unemployment before it turns into higher structural unemployment. This requires policies targeted at the long-term unemployed, such as a more intensive and personalised approach to case management (e.g. regular face-to-face interviews and the development of individual action plans) as well as measures to find job opportunities that contribute to skills acquisition and work experience. Examples of such programmes targeted at the long‑term unemployed are the Work Programme in the United Kingdom and the Work Experience Phase in Australia. See Chapter 3 of OECD (2013e) for a summary of recent country-specific reviews in the area of ALMPs. Belgium, Finland, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and Slovenia need to improve the design and integration of unemployment benefit and activation schemes so as to better support the return to work. Unemployment income replacement rates for both short and long-term unemployment spells are above the OECD average, while in some cases only weak conditionality for receiving benefits is in place (Venn, 2012). Recommendations include: i) reinforcing the link between benefits, job search and participation in active measures; ii) systematically evaluating the effectiveness of such measures; iii) tapering unemployment benefits along the unemployment spell; and iv) reducing the combined generosity of unemployment benefits and other social transfers (including for the inactive). Estonia, Israel, the Slovak Republic, South Africa and the United Kingdom need to develop ALMPs to help workers with weak labour market attachment to find jobs and, where needed, to develop appropriate skills. The emphasis of the recommendations is on better targeting of the groups most at risk (in particular youth and the low-skilled), as well as on more accountability and co-operation with employers. Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Spain and the United States have experienced a sharp increase in long-term unemployment relative to pre-crisis levels ( ) – and there is evidence that this may have reduced matching efficiency, at least in the United States. As a result, these countries should devote more resources to ALMPs in general but programmes should also be systematically evaluated and funding should be allocated to those that are most effective at increasing employability. As introduced above, policies targeted at long-term unemployed, including re-training programmes, are needed at the current juncture, concentrating on measures that work best given country-specific context. Some emerging-market economies (Chile, Indonesia and Turkey) are recommended to increase the coverage of social protection because their welfare systems are comparatively underdeveloped, which contributes to labour informality. The Russian Federation should raise the level of unemployment benefits and reinforce active labour market and training programmes. This would help reducing the high incidence of long-term unemployment ( Long-term rather than short-term considerations should now prevail as a basis for further action in this area. Public spending on pensions is projected to increase in the vast majority of advanced countries as well as in a number of emerging-market countries over the next 40 years (OECD, 2013f; OECD, 2014a). Such a development is natural as the predicted increase in life expectancy at the age of 65 for the next half century will lead to much higher numbers of pensioners than currently. By now it is widely accepted in most countries that pension systems and rules need to change over time, in particular that retirement ages should adjust to longevity. ), which display relatively low levels of labour force participation and are characterised by financial disincentives for workers to remain active at older ages. Routes to early retirement (for example, exemptions and relaxation of benefit rules targeted at the older unemployed) have been closed by many countries in the 2000s, and such reforms have been successful at raising older workers’ employment rates. Nevertheless there are exceptions such as Austria, Belgium and Poland. For the rest of the countries that have a priority in this area, most recommendations cover the general system, e.g. adjusting benefits and retirement age in line with life expectancy and making benefits actuarially neutral. Czech Republic European Union ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Taper UB along duration/reduce age-bias in UB/reduce progressively the combined generosity of UB and other social benefits (i.e. reduce spikes in marginal effective tax rates) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Expand the coverage of UB, job counselling and training programs to e.g. non-regular workers ✓ ✓ ✓ Strengthen resources for job-search assistance and training whilst improving targeting of ALMPs ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa ✓ Taper UB along duration/reduce age-bias in UB/reduce progressively the combined generosity of UB and other social benefits (i.e. reduce spikes in marginal effective tax rates) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Expand the coverage of UB, job counselling and training programs to e.g. non-regular workers ✓ Strengthen resources for job-search assistance and training whilst improving targeting of ALMPs ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ), for which a high prevalence of disability has historically been a major challenge. Priority should also be given to disability reforms in the United States, for which this has more recently become an issue: indeed, evidence suggests that the increase in (self-reported) disability may account for about one third of the decline in labour force participation since the beginning of the crisis (OECD, 2014d). Reforms to activate recipients of benefits that previously were not conditional on availability for work (such as those on disability benefits) require care and may take time to show up in higher employment rates for these groups. Activation requirements may be targeted on new claimants to test and refine new provisions and only extended later. This reduces the risk that such reforms result in a build-up of long-term unemployment. See Chapter 2 in OECD (2013e). Stringent employment protection legislation (EPL) may slow down the reallocation process and aggregate productivity growth because it raises labour adjustment costs for the firms (Haltiwanger et al., 2006; Bassanini et al., 2009; Autor et al., 2007). It may also have become more undesirable from the perspective of promoting entrepreneurship and risky investment in knowledge-based capital (KBC), as shown in a recent study (Andrews et al., 2013). At the same time, employment protection may raise the worker’s commitment and the firm’s incentives to invest in firm-specific human capital, which could raise within-firm productivity (Boeri et al., 2014). OECD countries are showing signs of a pause in reforms, which follows a period of important changes in a number of countries. See Chapter 2 in OECD (2013e) for a detailed review of reforms in the area of employment protection over the last decade. A clear tendency towards reducing the strictness of employment protection is observable over the past decade, mostly focussed on regulations governing individual and collective dismissals. Between 2008 and 2013, in particular, more than one-third of OECD countries undertook some relaxation of these regulations, with reforms concentrated in countries with the most stringent provisions at the beginning of the period. Moreover, the main policy interventions since 2008 have consisted in limiting the possibility of reinstatement in the case of unfair dismissal and the extension of the duration of the trial period. These have typically been found in the empirical literature to be aspects of EPL most affecting gross worker flows, in general, and job-to-job transitions, in particular (Bassanini and Garnero, 2013). Only limited action has occurred as regards temporary contracts. This is in marked contrast with developments during the 1990s and early 2000s, whereby in many countries, hiring on temporary contracts was largely deregulated while stringent restrictions on regular contracts were maintained. Such reforms largely contributed to the development of dual labour markets where outsiders tend to move from one temporary contract to another while insiders enjoy high protection and greater job stability. The empirical literature has clearly pointed out the negative consequences of dual labour markets, in both efficiency and equity terms. Duality leads to labour and capital misallocation as well as to under-investment in training for temporary workers, hence ultimately to lower productivity (Bassanini et al., 2009; Cingano et al., 2010; Lepage et al., 2012; Bentolila et al., 2012; Blanchard and Landier, 2002). The costs of duality are high: excess employment volatility, reduced access to stable jobs, recurrent spells of temporary jobs, and long and frequent unemployment spells among Despite the progress achieved, reforms in this area are still needed in a number of countries. The emphasis is on simplifying procedures and reducing costs associated with lay-offs but at the same time strengthening the protection of individuals (as opposed to jobs). This requires having in place adequate income support for the unemployed as well as effective job-search counselling and re-employment services. As a result, job protection recommendations are often formulated as part of broader labour market reform packages – with differential emphasis depending on countries’ challenges and weaknesses. Priorities in this area often also cover the efficiency of the process of dispute resolution, as this is a key determinant of the costs and effectiveness of employment protection. See OECD (2013e), Chapter 2. For employers, complex or time-consuming legal processes can add significantly to the cost of hiring and especially dismissing workers. But equally, if it is difficult or costly for employees to pursue cases of unfair dismissal, they might be exposed to arbitrary actions from employers. Resolving disputes early (either through pre-court dispute resolution mechanisms or pre‑trial conciliation) saves time and money compared with waiting for a court decision. Establishing specialised courts or procedures to handle unfair dismissal cases (as is currently the case in more than half of OECD countries) and alternative resolution mechanisms are options to increase effectiveness and efficiency of consultations:   Czech Republic European Union Ease EPL on regular workers to narrow the gap with respect to non-regular workers and tackle labour market duality ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa Ease EPL on regular workers to narrow the gap with respect to non-regular workers and tackle labour market duality ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Low-paid employment is a policy concern when it is associated with in-work poverty or reflects situations where workers are unable to get wages in line with their productivity or to find jobs that make full use of their skills. Such may be the case in Germany and the United States: the proportion of low-wage earners (i.e. earning less than two-thirds of the median wage) is close to one-fifth of employees in Germany and one-quarter in the United States. In order to address this problem, Germany has recently introduced a national legal minimum wage and in the United States, the starting level of the minimum wage has been raised substantially. (i.e. minimum-wage workers’ take-home pay after they pay taxes, social security contributions and, possibly, receive benefits) can fail to assure adequate living standards and is likely to be ineffective in fostering incentives to work for individuals at the margin of the labour market, in particular the low-skilled. Too high minimum (i.e. the gross cost of employing a minimum-wage worker once payroll taxes and employers contributions are added) can reduce firms’ incentives to hire or to formalise employment. Countries have shown quite different preferences in this area ( Countries are ordered by ascending order of the minimum-to-median wage ratio for all countries except for Germany and the United States (ratio after reform proposals). Percentage of minimum to average wage for China, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and India. Data refer to 2013 for BRIICS countries, Latvia and Colombia and to 2009-10 for India. OECD Employment Outlook 2014 ; China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, National Bureau of Statistics; Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística ( Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios ); ILO (International Labour Organization), , Vol. 152, No. 3-4. i) providing differentiated minimum wages (by age to take account of differences in experience, and by region to take account of differences in average income levels); ii) delegating to an independent agency the responsibility for setting the level of minimum wages; iii) establishing preferential rates to lower non-wage labour costs at the minimum wage; and iv) introducing in-work-benefits for low-paid workers to avoid nominal increases in minimum wages and therefore reduce the real labour costs of minimum wage earners. ), earlier reforms in this area may have contributed to the significant decline in unit labour costs observed since 2009 in Greece, Portugal and Spain. (OECD, 2013a.) See also OECD (2014f) for an initial evaluation of the comprehensive reform of the Spanish labour market undertaken in 2012. , Panel A). Countries are classified according to their current account balance before the global financial crisis (2007). The last available year is 2012 for Austria, Estonia, France, Italy, Portugal and the Slovak Republic. OECD Employment Outlook 2014 . Nominal wager rigidity has become more binding since the start of the countries in countries such as Estonia, Greece, the Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom. See OECD (2014e). See evidence and discussion in Chapter 2 of OECD (2014e). Prices eventually adjust in response to wage developments. Yet, available evidence suggests that nominal reductions in wages have not fully transmitted into lower prices in euro area periphery countries where nominal wage adjustments have been large: real unit labour costs have tended to decline, and this decline tends to be largely concentrated in the non-tradable sector. This suggests that lower nominal wages, particularly in the non-tradable sector, were not fully passed onto lower prices, reducing the labour share in overall income ( , Panel B, and OECD, 2014e). This is likely to reflect limited product market competition in the non-tradable sector. As developed below, product market reforms are necessary complements to labour market reforms in this context, by spurring price responsiveness to wage developments. To rebalance the economy, activity and jobs need to shift from non-tradable to tradable industries. Again, the data suggest that such reallocation has been particularly slow in euro area periphery countries, potentially reflecting skills mismatch (OECD, 2014e). As a result, reforms of ALMPs are also needed – especially for training and work-experience programmes.   Czech Republic European Union ✓ Improve targeting or reduce the use of housing subsidies/improve targeting in the provision of social housing ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Improve targeting or reduce the use of housing subsidies/improve targeting in the provision of social housing ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ For Finland, Sweden and the United Kingdom, this recommendation is mainly aimed at boosting productivity but is covered here to simplify the presentation. The main channels through which policy distortions can depress labour utilisation and productivity include (see Chapter 4 in OECD, 2011a): Excessive rent regulations result in under-developed rental markets (e.g. Sweden). This hinders labour mobility and reallocation, reducing in turn matching between workers and jobs. The consequence is lower productivity and higher unemployment. Overly stringent planning and zoning regulations raise house price levels and volatility (e.g. the United Kingdom). This undermines financial and economic stability. It also reduces productivity as a result of lower competition – for instance in certain sectors such as retail trade. Generous tax treatment of home ownership (such as mortgage interest deductibility without taxation of imputed rents, e.g. the United States) is an inefficient public subsidy: it contributes to capital misallocation, which reduces productivity and raises housing price pressures, with the risk of creating housing bubbles. Furthermore, it is generally a regressive transfer, as lower-income households are less likely to benefit from it (Cournède et al., 2013). Labour productivity growth has tended to be negative in the large majority of OECD countries during the crisis period, in part as a result of labour hoarding. The gradual recovery in aggregate demand has allowed productivity growth to turn positive during the initial recovery but it remains sluggish in most countries. One of the factors contributing to the slow pick-up in labour productivity is the weak recovery in fixed investment, in particular compared to previous recovery episodes (OECD, 2014g). Macroeconomic policies can help stimulate investment by supporting demand. Structural policies can also play a role in improving short-term prospects, notably by reducing uncertainty about the state of the economy, future policy developments and external financing conditions. Co-ordinated efforts across countries should also be pursued to tackle remaining financial system dysfunctions and ensure that the quality of banks’ balance sheets is restored. Efforts in individual countries on areas identified as priorities are also likely to help boosting investment, in particular the lifting of restrictions facing foreign investors, as well as those hindering the funding of infrastructure projects. Beyond cyclical developments, there is some evidence of a general slowdown in productivity growth during the 2000s compared with the previous decade ( (OECD, 2014a). Emerging-market countries have grown rapidly in recent years, but the pace of catching-up is likely to slow sharply as GDP per capita in these countries converges towards higher levels. Because of demographic developments in advanced economies, growth is bound to become increasingly dependent on rising multifactor productivity (MFP): OECD long-term projections suggest that the MFP contribution to GDP per capita could rise from around 54% to 88% in OECD countries between 2010 and 2060. Trend labour productivity has slowed in a majority of OECD countries since the 1990s Difference in average annual growth of GDP per hour worked between 2000-13 and 1990-2000 Labour productivity is defined as GDP per employee for Brazil, China, Colombia, India and Indonesia. The first year available is 1991 for Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Mexico and OECD; 1992 for the Russian Federation; 1993 for the Czech Republic and Poland; 1994 for the European Union; 1995 for Austria, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia; 1998 for Latvia. – as discussed in the previous section. Indeed, education is a fundamental driver of long-term growth and requires pursued efforts over an extended period of time. . In pre-primary, primary and secondary education, the common emphasis is on raising teacher quality and addressing educational inequalities, with a focus on enhancing the targeting and effectiveness of resources devoted to disadvantaged students and schools. Indeed, social returns to education are high, but relate mostly to earlier stages of education and especially for disadvantaged individuals (Heckman et al., 2005). Increasing the quality of lower-level schooling across broad segments of the population is thus important both for securing improved productivity, but also for achieving rising participation in higher education. High‑quality primary and secondary education should be prioritised in public funding because those are a prerequisite for raising skill levels and expanding tertiary education. Recommendations to address bottlenecks in schooling infrastructure are relatively frequent for emerging-market countries, which may require raising public investment.   Czech Republic European Union ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Improve teaching quality/improve incentives for talented teachers (especially to work in difficult schools) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Expand access to and effectiveness of apprenticeships and VET and their relevance to labour market needs ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Increase and/or reform indirect R&amp;D support – tax incentives ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Enhance efficiency of immigration policy: education and innovation policies/recognition of professional qualifications ✓ New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Improve teaching quality/improve incentives for talented teachers (especially to work in difficult schools) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Expand access to and effectiveness of apprenticeships and VET and their relevance to labour market needs ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Increase and/or reform indirect R&amp;D support – tax incentives ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Enhance efficiency of immigration policy: education and innovation policies/recognition of professional qualifications ✓ Recommendations in the area of tertiary education are more prevalent for higher‑income countries, with a majority of priorities aimed at increasing autonomy and enhancing funding. The emphasis is on increasing co-payments by students. Indeed, funding reforms where students finance a larger share of direct costs could align incentives better and provide additional financing for an expansion of tertiary education because (OECD, 2014a): of degrees, but may also encourage students to finalise studies quickly and discourage entry of students with low probabilities of completing university. This discouragement effect underscores the limitations associated with co‑funding, which may eventually reduce tertiary education achievements and therefore productivity. Rising internationalisation of higher education – with the number of students from OECD countries enrolled abroad more than doubling between 2000 and 2011 (OECD, 2013g) – and increasing international mobility of skilled labour, further strengthens the rationale for students to cover a larger share of the costs of tertiary education. Increasing the adaptability of the labour force will nevertheless be challenged by population ageing. An ageing workforce will likely be less able to adapt to structural change, risking increasing mismatches in the labour market and slow structural change. Longer working-lives will mean a longer period where depreciation of skills and technological change risk making human capital obsolete. This calls for expanding life‑long learning. Policies should focus on facilitating the development of labour force skills and competencies: among the unemployed, as discussed in the context of ALMPs; but also among workers throughout their working-lives. The case for government support for life-long learning may be as strong as for tertiary education, considering that lower cross‑country mobility among older workers means that the social benefits in terms of higher productivity and longer careers to a larger extent will benefit the domestic economy. , Panel A). Policies are needed to address both challenges. Compulsory education should do as much as possible to ensure that school‑leavers have the necessary skills. At later stages, lifelong policies should ensure that there are opportunities to catch up. Across the OECD, the adults that would benefit most from lifelong learning are those that have the lowest probability to participate in job‑related training, but there are marked cross-country differences in this respect ( , Panel B). In some countries this is due to the fact that some categories of less skilled workers (in particular non-regular workers) receive very little training. Access to training should be expanded and associated institutions should identify adults who require support and provide them with learning opportunities tailored to their needs. The averages represent the average scores of OECD countries participating in the survey. The slope of socio-economic gradient represents the score-point difference associated with one unit increase in parents’ level of educational attainment. Low literacy refers to level 1 level 4/5 OECD Skills Outlook 2013: First Results from the Survey of Adult Skills Such assets have been classified more formally under three broad categories, i.e. computerised information, innovative property and economic competencies. See Andrews and de Serres (2012). Well-designed innovation policies are needed to encourage KBC-led growth, because investing in KBC involves considerable uncertainty while associated outcomes are often widely shared within the economy. They should be complemented by appropriate framework conditions, e.g. well-functioning product, labour and financial (especially venture capital) markets that encourage the reallocation of capital and jobs across firms as well as bankruptcy laws that spread the cost of failure broadly. 2011 data for Australia, Iceland, Mexico, New Zealand and South Africa. The patent measure is based on triadic patents, which refer to a series of patents for the one invention filed at the European Patent Office, the United States Patent and Trademark Office and the Japan Patent Office. , No. 1046, OECD Publishing, Paris. Public support to R&amp;D remains the dominant pillar of innovation policy. A mix of incremental R&amp;D tax incentives and selective direct grants is considered the best approach, but administrative and compliance costs associated with such mix can be substantial. R&amp;D tax incentives tend to have higher deadweight losses, for instance reflecting the unintended consequences of protecting incumbents and thus slowing down the reallocation process and the entry of new dynamic firms, often an important source of knowledge-based capital. R&amp;D tax incentives should thus be refundable and contain carry‑over provisions in order to make them more suitable to the needs of young firms (Andrews and Criuscolo, 2013). A common recommendation is to achieve a better balance between tax incentives and direct grants while pursuing a close evaluation of the grant programmes. Innovative capacity requires a strong network of knowledge transmission nurtured through R&amp;D collaboration among firms as well as between higher education institutes and firms. Hence, recommendations often include strengthening collaboration between research institutes/universities and industry. See Barone and Cingano (2011), Bourlès et al. (2010), Conway et al. (2006), Bas and Causa (2012), Andrews and Criuscolo (2013). Recent empirical analysis has delivered fresh evidence that product market reforms can also increase the returns to education. Such result is obtained at the micro-level based on the recent 2005 Portugal reform, which reduced the time, cost and complexity of starting a business by establishing one-stop shops where an entrepreneur can register a company in less than an hour in one single office (Fernandes et al., 2014); the reform increased returns to skills in addition to boosting firm creation and reducing industry concentration. Bourlès et al. (2010) simulate average annual gains in MFP growth between 0.2 and 1.7 percentage points within the five years period following reforms to adopt best practice (upstream) regulations. ,    Czech Republic European Union ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Encourage trade facilitation measures – reduce transaction costs ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Encourage trade facilitation measures – reduce transaction costs ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Reducing economy-wide regulatory burdens is needed in many countries. Frequent associated recommendations include lifting barriers to firm entry and exit, improving the transparency of regulation, reducing state control and strengthening competition frameworks. Some countries (such as Canada) are advised to reduce the stringency of environmental regulations, as those can affect barriers to entry through several channels ( The proposed indicator sheds light on some areas that could benefit from policymakers’ attention in designing future environmental policy proposals or seeking to reform existing setups. The indicator is referred to as Direct application of more stringent rules for entrants (e.g. vintage-differentiated regulations) and additional fixed costs, which discriminate against prospective entrants, for example due to the time and resources it takes to learn to comply with the regulation. based on historical performance – grandfathered emission rights, public procurement advantages, subsidies or tax breaks in return for improvements in environmental outcomes. Albrizio et al. (2014) and Kozluk (2014). Reducing sector-specific regulatory burdens, especially in non-manufacturing, e.g. retail trade and professional services as well as network industries, is also a very frequent recommendation. Product market reforms in this area could facilitate adjustments in unit labour costs and boost jobs creation in European countries facing high structural unemployment and competitiveness challenges, as argued in the previous section. In particular, reducing regulatory barriers to firm entry and competition in sectors where there is pent-up demand such as retail trade and professional services could spur job creation. Stronger competition, especially in services, would ensure that recent wage reductions in euro area periphery countries result in job creation and lower consumer prices rather than higher profits. This would help workers in these countries to reap the benefits from recently-introduced labour market reforms. In fact, product market reforms become even more important now insofar as the lack of competition in product markets risks undermining the success of labour market liberalisation. Core euro area countries have not taken much action to liberalise sheltered sectors (OECD, 2013a), and this weakens internal euro area rebalancing. Yet high barriers to competition undermine these countries’ productive potential and need to be reduced, especially in non-tradable services. Product market liberalisation would help boosting overall productivity by raising the currently very low contribution from services industries in some countries, such as Germany ( The contribution of the service sector to overall productivity is weak in several countries 2001-10 data for Hungary, Korea and United States. 2001-08 data for Japan. Bouis et al. (2011), Andrews and Criuscolo (2013), Andrews and Cingano (2012), Bas et al. (2013), Fernandes and Paunov (2012). The participation in Global Value Chains (GVC) – activities where goods and services cross several borders along different value-added stages – has allowed lower-income countries accessing world demand and advanced technologies. Nevertheless, trade within GVCs can magnify the negative impact of tariff and non-tariff trade barriers (OECD, 2013i). This makes it all the more important to reduce such barriers in countries where they remain too high. In addition, enhancing trade facilitation, by e.g. measures to modernise and simplify customs procedures, would improve the capacity to export and import high-quality inputs. See Moise and Sorescu (2013) for a comprehensive study on the effects of trade facilitation. The study provides an assessment of the impact of specific trade facilitation measures on countries’ trade. This assessment is based on Trade facilitation Indicators (TFIs) developed at the OECD. Such indicators cover the main policy areas under negotiation at the WTO and are aimed at estimating the impact of addressing country-specific specific hurdles to trade and border procedures. Increased exposure to FDI can also encourage integration into GVCs and boost productivity through technology transfer and the provision of sophisticated inputs. Recommendations in this area cover both specific sectors where restrictions are a particular concern – in particular in services, representing almost half of the value-added embodied in the exports of G20 economies This refers to the year 2009.  – and more broadly, the transparency of screening procedures. Public subsidies for agricultural production distort efficient resources allocation and limit productivity gains. Reducing producer support – and to de-link it from production – is a priority in the countries where subsidies remain high ( and OECD, 2013a; 2014b). For example, Japan and the United States have been gradually reducing agricultural subsidies. Similarly to agricultural support, energy subsidies are sometimes used as social policy devices, but they distort markets and waste resources that could be more effectively targeted directly at the poor – such as through cash transfers – or at growth-promoting spending. Reducing such subsidies substantially is a priority for Indonesia. Significant reform progress in this area would prevent environmental damages from slowing down growth, for instance by promoting a shift toward a cleaner development path. Such policies could also generate significant fiscal revenues (OECD, 2013j). Meanwhile, the International Energy Agency has estimated that price-driven subsidies encouraging the consumption of fossil fuels in a selection of developing and emerging-market countries amounted to approximately USD 544 billion in 2012 (IEA, 2013). Tax system – structure and efficiency See OECD (2014a). Property taxes have additional benefits. Recent empirical evidence suggests that a greater reliance on property taxes pertaining to sub-national governments contributes to fiscal discipline (Presbitero et al., 2014). This is likely to reflect the relative advantage of this form of taxation in promoting the accountability, responsibility and discipline of sub-national authorities with respect to other forms of local revenues (e.g. income taxes or sales taxes).   Czech Republic European Union Tax system – structure and efficiency ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Broaden the tax base – reduce tax expenditures ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa Tax system – structure and efficiency ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Broaden the tax base – reduce tax expenditures ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Shifting the tax burden towards less mobile tax bases could gain stronger relevance and traction in the future – in a context where further global integration will make some tax bases more mobile, which will put pressure on income and corporate taxes. Furthermore, cross-country co-ordination in tax policy may be needed in view of the rise in globalisation, an issue which is not covered among country-specific Simplifying the tax system with a view to raise efficiency and compliance should dominate the tax reform agenda. Combating tax evasion and broadening the tax base is advocated in several countries. Recommendations to eliminate inefficient and often regressive tax exemptions are frequent: for example, deductions for mortgage interest for owner-occupied housing in income taxation (e.g. in the United States). Countries have been relatively unsuccessful at tackling those tax loopholes, which probably reflects political economy obstacles, i.e. opposition by those who benefit from such loopholes. Efforts should be stepped‑up, not least because associated changes will probably require incremental implementation. Reforms in this area would in most cases have beneficial equity and fiscal effects. ). Improving monitoring mechanisms of public sector performance (e.g. Finland) and the efficiency of public procurement rules (e.g. Denmark) are frequent recommendations. Some countries (e.g. Greece) need to focus on improving the efficiency of public administration, which can be achieved by well-designed staff performance evaluation systems but also by expanding e-government. ). Reforms to improve hospital efficiency and care management incentives can keep healthcare costs under control (New Zealand, Switzerland and the United Kingdom). High private costs and low coverage of health insurance has been the main issue in the United States. This has been an area of major reform action by the current administration. Policies need now to ensure that the provisions of the Affordable Care Act are effectively implemented and their impact monitored. Public healthcare challenges can thus be much broader than issues of cost control. In particular, inequalities in health outcomes and in access to public services are major challenges for New Zealand, and this requires prevention efforts to change lifestyles. ). This would help to attract private investment and optimise use. Specific recommendations include: i) streamlining regulatory and land acquisition processes (India); ii) ensuring regulatory bodies’ management transparency (Latvia); and iii) promoting more private-sector participation in infrastructure through regular concessions and PPPs (Brazil and Indonesia), based on prior cost-benefit analysis (Colombia). Czech Republic European Union ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Reduce the scope for public officials’ interference in decision-making processes/corruption Encourage private participation in financial markets/gradually reduce state intervention while ensuring strong prudential regulation New Zealand United Kingdom United States Russian Federation South Africa ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Reduce the scope for public officials’ interference in decision-making processes/corruption ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Encourage private participation in financial markets/gradually reduce state intervention while ensuring strong prudential regulation ✓ ✓ ✓ Enhancing capacity and regulation of infrastructure is a priority in some advanced countries. The emphasis is on addressing infrastructure shortages in a cost-effective way, in the area of transport (Australia and the United Kingdom), energy (Estonia) or both (Poland). Reforms in this area also need optimising the use of infrastructure. This can be achieved through pricing mechanisms such as congestion charges (New Zealand and the United Kingdom) or carbon prices (Poland). is essential for economic growth (Glaeser et al., 2004; Acemoglu et al., 2001; 2005; Johnsson et al., 2005; Djankov et al., 2002); this encompasses different dimensions such as: i) the provision of security of person and of property; ii) the enforcement of contracts; and iii) checks on government as well as on corruption and private capture. Recent evidence also shows that the effective provision of security ( ) has strong correlation with the volatility of growth. Better enforcement of the rule of law – implying stronger judiciary independence or an overall strengthening of institutions – is a policy priority for China, Indonesia, Mexico, the Russian Federation and the Slovak Republic ( As mentioned in the introduction, financial market reform has generally not featured prominently among country-specific priorities, owing to the particular need for strong international co‑ordination in this area. The European Union introduced substantial reform initiatives in banking supervision and resolution, and this is therefore no longer considered as an area for reform priority (see EU country note and euro area survey for in-depth analysis, OECD, 2014h). inter alia Cournède and Denk (2014), Cecchetti and Karrubi (2012) and Arcand et al. (2012). further development and reform of the sector is clearly needed in emerging-market countries, in particular Brazil, China and India. The emphasis of previous reforms in these countries has been on promoting financial market liberalisation, but further reforms are needed, to support liberalisation with strong macro prudential regulation and supervision. In China, the banking sector is subject to stringent control, while grassroots liberalisation brought to life numerous competitors exempt from such regulations. Priority should thus be given to striking a better balance between liberalisation and regulation in financial markets, by e.g. removing implicit state guarantees to allow for better pricing of risk. Income inequality has increased in a majority of OECD countries since the mid-1990s. Households’ disposable income has grown by less than gross domestic product (GDP), and income of the poorest households by less than that of the richest. Other policies that promote labour force participation and job creation also widen the wage dispersion. However, because they contribute to raising employment – not least among lower-skilled workers – such reforms have a neutral effect on the dispersion of households’ disposable income. focuses on maximising GDP per capita. More specifically, the flow of goods and services produced in the economy, as measured by GDP, is chosen as the central objective, even if proxying for only one dimension of wellbeing. At the same time, the OECD has been exploring distributional issues for a number of years (OECD, 2011a, 2013a, 2014a, b). In 2013, the Inclusive Growth Initiative was launched with a view to building a growth strategy that better take into account income distribution as well as other dimensions of wellbeing such as health outcomes. For The 2006 issue of (OECD, 2006) discussed the limitation of GDP to gauge material living standards and well-being (Chapter 6). Some measures that extend GDP numbers to non‑market production have been explored in the 2011 issue (OECD, 2011b, Chapter 1 Annex). The 2012 issue (OECD, 2012, Chapter 5) reported the empirical findings on the effects of a selection of structural reforms on earning inequality, whereas the 2013 issue (OECD, 2013a, Chapter 2) offered a comprehensive overview on the side-effects of When talking about inequality, it should be kept in mind that a certain degree of income dispersion is a fundamental characteristic of dynamic market economies, which are based on trust, property rights and the rule of law. The notion that one can enjoy the benefits from one’s own efforts is a powerful incentive to invest in human capital, new ideas and products, as well as to undertake risky commercial ventures, all of which are key drivers of growth and income generation. However, beyond a certain point, widening income inequalities will undermine the foundations of market economies and adversely feed back into economic growth. Income inequality may also translate into inequality in opportunity which decreases social mobility and weakens incentives to invest in knowledge. The resulting under-investment in, and misallocation of skills, ultimately undermine efficiency and growth potential. Income inequality has widened across OECD countries On average across OECD countries and from the mid-1990s to the late 2000s, gains in household disposable incomes have not matched those in GDP per capita and the gap has been particularly large for poorer households and the lower middle class, suggesting that growth has come with rising inequality ( involves a comparison between National Accounts (macro) and Household Survey (micro) data. As such, the comparability could be affected by measurement discrepancies (see Causa et al., 2014). Indeed, recent studies reported steadily growing income inequalities in a majority of OECD countries during the past three decades (e.g. OECD, 2011c, 2013b, 2014a). There is growing consensus that the most appropriate income concept for analysing income distribution is household disposable income adjusted for publicly-provided in-kind services, such as education and health care spending (Stiglitz et al., 2009). This measure is the most comprehensive income concept, and includes several policy and non-policy factors shaping its distribution. However, since measures of household disposable income adjusted for in-kind services have only been produced for recent years, longer trends can only be examined on the basis of series without such adjustment. displays the change in the distribution of household income between mid-1990s and 2011, as measured by the Gini coefficient. The dispersion in market income, i.e. income taxes and transfers–has increased in many advanced OECD countries, while it fell substantially in Turkey and Mexico. Inequality in household disposable income, i.e.  Average annual growth of GDP per capita and household disposable income (1995-2011): Weighted average over 26 OECD countries ). The average income of the 26 OECD countries is calculated from income data expressed on a per consumption basis in USD 2011 constant prices and 2011 constant PPPs with Purchasing Power Parities for private consumption. The OECD average is calculated using population weights. Change in Gini coefficients from the mid-1990s to 2011 The figure displays the changes in Gini coefficients corresponding to inequality in household market and disposable incomes. The period of observation is between 1995 and 2011 except for Australia, Finland, Hungary, the Netherlands and the United States (1995-2012), Chile, the Czech Republic, France and Luxembourg (1996-2011), Greece, Ireland and the United Kingdom (1994-2011) and Japan (1995-2009). The changes in Gini coefficient of market income for Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal and Spain are based on imputation. An important policy question is whether some of the forces driving GDP growth – including policy changes – may have also fuelled inequalities. Finding empirical evidence of specific policy trade-offs between growth and a more equal income distribution is not straightforward. Some reasons are methodological: the assessment of inequality depends on ). In discussing the impact of pro-growth policies on income inequality, this section will mainly refer to three measures of income: individual wages among employed workers, individual labour earnings among the whole working‑age population and household disposable income among the entire population. The Gini index is the most popular measure due to its wide availability and comparability across country and overtime. While the rankings of a country may be altered depending on the specific inequality measure used, very high cross-country correlations between each of these alternative inequality measures and the Gini index are observed for OECD countries (OECD, 2008). However, the Gini index lacks granularity for characterising information about inequality across different subsets of the income distribution. This can be overcome by relying on income standards, as shown in Causa, de Serres and Ruiz (2014). ). In particular, changes in inequality measured by one summary indicator such as the widely-used Gini coefficient can mask diverging developments across different portions of the income distribution. For instance, recent evidence (Causa, de Serres and Ruiz, 2014) suggests that for many OECD countries, income inequality has widened between low and middle-income households, as the gains in disposable incomes have been particularly subdued for poorer households. In Spain, disparities grew among the households in the lower half of income distribution while the Gini coefficient indicates no change in overall inequality. In other countries, such as Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States, inequalities grew within the upper half of income distribution and in particular at the very high-end, as 50 to 60% of total income gains have accrued to the top 1% of households (Piketty and Saez, 2014; OECD, 2014a). Demographic factors such as the changes in age structure (increase in older household) and household structure (increase in people living alone) explain significant portion of the change in income distribution for some countries such as Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom (OECD, 2008). OECD 50-Year Global Scenario suggests that wage inequality could grow by between 17% and 40% within the OECD countries by 2060 if the same trend of SBTC observed over the past 25 years persists (OECD, 2014b). Such growth in wage inequality is slightly faster than the average annual increases observed during the early 1990s to the pre-crisis period in the OECD countries. Wage inequality is measured in this case as the ratio of the upper bound of the 9th decile of the wage distribution for full-time employees to the upper bound of the 1st decile. Under such a scenario, low inequality countries like Norway, Sweden and Switzerland, will see inequality levels similar to the OECD average today, whereas the OECD average will get closer to today’s US level. Virtually all increases in inequality would take place between high- and medium-income earners, in line with recent evidence suggesting that technology increasingly replaces medium-skilled jobs (Braconier and Ruiz-Valenzuela, 2014; Goos et al., 2010). Stronger product market competition induces firms to improve productivity (Pavnick, 2002, Aghion et al., 2005). Such productivity improvement is often realised through investment in knowledge-based capital. For instance, Bloom et al. (2012) reported that import competition with China induced European firms to invest in IT, R&amp;D and better management practices. Intensive use of KBC, namely IT and complementary organisational change, is considered to have reduced the demand for codifiable, routine job (Bresnahan et al., 2002; Autor et al., 2006). Braconier and Ruiz-Valenzuela (2014); Koske et al. (2012); OECD (2011c). Some labour market and income support reforms aimed at fostering employment by raising incentives to work and to hire can also result in a wider wage distribution among those employed. For example, lowering the minimum wage or reducing the unemployment benefit replacement rate as well as easing the stringency of employment protection may lead to higher wage dispersion by reducing the reservation wage and by increasing the creation of low-paid jobs (OECD, 2011c). The adverse distributional effects from such reforms are however more likely to be concentrated in the lower half of the wage distribution (OECD, 2011c; Koske et al., 2012; Braconier and Ruiz-Valenzuela, 2014). Other pro-growth reforms can reduce wage dispersion. As mentioned above, there is fairly widespread evidence that more education is associated with smaller wage dispersion (OECD, 2011c; Koske et al., 2012; Braconier and Ruiz-Valenzuela, 2014). As a result, reforms that enhance provision, access and quality of basic education as well as higher education are expected to reduce wage inequality by increasing the supply of skilled workers. In a similar vein, increasing the provision or the effectiveness of active labour market policies (ALMPs) can also mitigate rising wage inequality, insofar as such policies encourage jobseekers’ up-skilling through training programmes – an argument which can be extended to policies oriented towards lifelong learning. However, because education reforms take more time to bear fruit than measures in other areas, on balance , column 1). Higher wage dispersion among workers does not necessarily translate into wider income inequality among the broader working-age population (i.e. including both employed and non-employed). This is because the effects of growth-oriented reforms on earnings dispersion operate through two offsetting channels: they increase the dispersion of wages among those who are in employment, but they also improve the employment opportunities of those looking for a job, which reduces the inequality in earnings among the whole working-age population. The consequence of pro-growth structural reforms on inequality therefore depends on the relative size of the two effects, which is not clear a priori The composite indicator of structural reform reflects changes in a broad set of policy settings over the period 2000-12. See Selected OECD countries, 2000-11 ). The Gini coefficient is measured on the basis of household disposable income. The period of observation is between 2000 and 2011 except for Australia, Hungary, Mexico and the Netherlands (2000-12), Austria and Greece (1999-2011), Switzerland and Luxembourg (2001-11), the Czech Republic (2002-11), Iceland, the Slovak Republic and Turkey (2004-11), Japan (2000-09) and Korea (2006-11). The 2015 Extending the coverage of unemployment insurance and social protection Unambiguous reduction in inequality through employment effect and wider insurance against income risks. ALMPs improve both the employment opportunities and the earnings potential of low‑skilled, with an unclear net effect on wage dispersion. Easing stringent job protection on regular contracts encourages hiring. Equity in job protections and training opportunities reduces earnings inequality between regular/non-regular workers. Unambiguous reduction in inequality through employment effect and earnings inequality. Lower tax wedges promote labour force participation and employment of low-skilled individuals. Wage dispersion may widen if employment increases mostly at the bottom of wage distribution. Reduction in inequality if employment effect dominates the wage dispersion effect. Effective measures allow higher labour force participation of women. Unambiguous reduction in inequality through effects on employment and wage dispersion. Increasing the provision and quality of early, primary and secondary education Unambiguous reduction in inequality through employment effect and reduced wage dispersion. Unambiguous reduction in inequality through employment effect and reduced wage dispersion. Reduction in inequality to the extent that the tax expenditures benefitted most the higher income households. Reduction in inequality to the extent that the subsidies benefitted most the higher income households. Reducing the replacement rate and duration of unemployment benefits/strengthening conditionality on job-search Tighter conditionality on unemployment and social benefits encourage job search. Potential increase in wage dispersion by lowering the reservation wage of the unemployed. Overall impact on inequality ambiguous. Inequality increases if the benefits were targeted to groups with low employment prospects. Lowering minimum wage can increases wage dispersion especially at the bottom of the wage distribution. Reducing disincentive for continued work at old age and tightening the eligibility to disability benefits Tighter access to early retirement and disability benefits encourage labour force participation (higher employment conditional on employability of the targeted groups). Inequality reduced as long as earned labour income is higher than pension or benefits. The overall impact ambiguous and depends on the relative strength of the employment and SBTC effects. Increase in inequality if leads to faster SBTC. Increase in inequality by reduced redistributive capacity of tax system and higher reliance on more regressive sources of taxation. Reforming housing policy (cut back housing subsidies, rent regulation, and tax expenditure on home ownership) Some reforms to stimulate labour force participation and job creation induce a trade‑off between higher employment and wider wage dispersion among those employed ( ). This is the case with reductions in the minimum wage, unemployment benefits and the labour tax wedge (especially when targeted at low-wage workers). Others, however, unambiguously reduce overall earning inequality. For instance, measures to reduce the gap in employment protection between regular and temporary contracts have favourable long‑term effect on employment while being conducive to a reduction in wage dispersion. Higher spending on ALMPs tends to be favourable to lower-skilled employment, while having little impact on wage dispersion. indicates that with the exception of measures that boost multi-factor productivity via faster technological progress (e.g. through investment in innovation), most reforms are found to have either little effects or to reduce overall earnings inequality. First, once controlling for technological progress, spurring integration in world markets through either external trade linkages or foreign direct investment has no clear effect on earnings inequality. Second, lowering regulatory barriers to competition in product markets is found to widen wage dispersion, but this effect can be more or less offset by employment gains. See in particular Chapter 7 and Chapter 5 of the respective references. However, their redistributive capacity has declined since the mid-1990s, partly due to stricter conditionality in transfers and to an increase in tax expenditures that benefit higher-income groups most. Furthermore, the growing importance of technological progress as a source of market income inequality, combined with the increasing cross‑border mobility of skilled workers, firms and intellectual property, is likely to challenge the redistributive capacity of tax and transfer systems and the perception of fairness. This underscores the importance of identifying robust and efficient redistribution instruments while co-ordinating policies at the global level (OECD, 2014b). indicates that among countries starting with a relatively high level of inequality, the number of recommendations likely to reduce inequality is nearly twice as large as the number with an undetermined impact or likely to raise inequality. The allocation of recommendations between those that help reducing inequality and those that do not help is more balanced among OECD countries with relatively low income inequality. This section discusses how reforms can be designed in order to make growth more inclusive. recommendations will help reduce household income inequality . 34 OECD countries are separated into the 17 countries with Gini coefficients of household disposable income (the 2011 data or of latest available year) lower than median and the other 17 countries with higher Gini coefficients. Removing obstacles to the labour participation of women is another reform that enhances growth and reduces income inequality. One priority in this area is to reduce the financial disincentives to return to work after childbirth, including specific features of the tax-benefits system, such as high taxes on second earners and ill-targeted childcare support. Making tax allowances and transfers conditional on second earner’s income level rather than on family income level, or expanding childcare support conditional on employment (such as childcare subsidies or paid maternity leave) are likely to reduce such disincentives. Furthermore, expanding the access to affordable childcare services is also likely to encourage women full-time labour participation and reduce inequality. Reducing regulatory barriers to entry and competition in sectors with large potential markets is associated with large employment effect, which is likely to reduce income inequality even in face of wider wage dispersion. A recent OECD study (Criscuolo et al., 2014) found that across 18 OECD and non-OECD countries, small firms that are five years old or less on average contribute to about 42% of job creation whereas they represent only 17% of employment. Such a disproportionally large role by young firms in job creation suggests that reducing barriers to entrepreneurship can contribute significantly to income equality via employment effect. Some reforms call for a careful implementation so as to take into account their potential adverse equity effects. For instance, in reforming unemployment benefits, special attention needs to be given to the long-term unemployed, which comprise more than one-third of the unemployed in the OECD area (at the first quarter of 2014). Because of their bleaker employment prospects, tightening benefits for this group can exacerbate poverty unless matched by other forms of social protection or targeted requalification measures. This also implies that unemployment benefits and active labour market policies should be primarily geared toward shortening the unemployment spell. Pro-growth structural reforms, the environment and environmental policies Environmental services are both direct determinants of the wellbeing of citizens and inputs into economic activity. However, they are often not priced efficiently (or not priced at all), and economic activity can hence undermine the ability of the environment to provide services in the future – putting the sustainability of growth and wellbeing at risk. This motivates an increasing attention to the interplay between growth and the environment. reviewed the potential effects of growth‑enhancing policies on the environment. The overall conclusion was that it is difficult to assess the effects of reforms per se – more growth is likely to increase pressures on environment, but most recommended reforms should not have major environmental consequences. The environmental consequences would rather be linked to the environmental policies in place and the details in the design and implementation of the pro-growth reform. This chapter takes the analysis a step further, drawing on new evidence on the economic effects of environmental damage and of environmental policies – stringency, instrument choice and design. Other things being equal, economic growth is likely to lead to higher emissions, pollution levels and environmental degradation. For instance, OECD projections show global greenhouse gas emissions rising by over 50% by 2050 in a business-as-usual scenario ( ). Over the same period, primary forests are projected to shrink by 13%, leading to a significant loss in terrestrial biodiversity, especially in parts of Asia, Europe and Southern Africa, as well as to concurrent losses in freshwater biodiversity (OECD, 2012). The global demand for freshwater is expected to rise rapidly, straining water availability in many regions: by 2050, some 3.9 billion people – 40% of global population – are likely to be living in areas subject to severe water stress. Air pollution is projected to affect more and more people around the world, driving up mortality and morbidity (OECD, 2014a). Greenhouse gas emissions are projected to continue increasing around the world stands for the group of OECD countries that are also part of Annex I of the Kyoto Protocol. e = Gigatonnes of CO OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction At the same time, as incomes and populations grow and environmental pressures mount, demand for a better quality of the natural environment may rise, leading increasingly wealthy societies to adopt more stringent environmental protection measures (see for example Grossman and Kruger, 1995). This can help slow the pace of pollution emissions relative to output growth (relative decoupling) or even lead to an absolute decline (absolute decoupling). Still, several key types of failures (e.g. public good nature of the environment, path-dependency, and international co-ordination issues) and uncertainties concerning environmental effects and the perceptions that environmental policies can harm economic activities can imply that environmental policies may remain insufficiently stringent. OECD modelling work projects sizeable effects of climate change on future GDP growth (OECD CIRCLE project, Dellink et al., 2014; OECD, 2014b). Analysis of the feedback loop from rising environmental impacts to GDP is still at an early stage, and focuses mainly on effects of greenhouse gas emissions. Nevertheless, projections show, under unchanged policies, GDP losses of 0.7% to 2.5% globally, coming largely from lower agricultural productivity and rising sea levels ( Global GDP impact based on temperature rise of 1.5°C-4.5°C Simulations from OECD ENV Linkages model, Dellink, R. et al. (2014), , No. 1135, The wellbeing impact of environmental degradation extends beyond climate change and GDP, to other dimensions of the quality of life, not least through health outcomes. Estimates of total costs focus primarily on mortality and morbidity. For instance, the health cost of air pollution in OECD countries (including deaths and illnesses) is estimated to total the equivalent of almost 4% of GDP in 2010 ( ), half of which is due to road transport. The wellbeing cost, broadly defined, was estimated at 12% of GDP for China, and at 9% of GDP for India (2005) (OECD, 2014a). The actual effects on GDP may be nuanced – a large part of these effects fall on the non-working population, and health effects may even increase demand, for example, for health services. Still, damage to health affects GDP, through higher absenteeism as well as lower labour productivity and human capital (see Isen et al., 2014; Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012, 2014). (derived by aggregating individuals’ willingness to pay to secure a small reduction in the risk of premature death) by the number of deaths attributable to outdoor air pollution, as released by the World Health Organisation (WHO) in 2010. Data refer to 2005 for India. Going for Growth 2013 The 2015 Introducing/increasing price signals and user fee in public infrastructure (e.g. congestion charges) Adequate use of road and energy infrastructure reduces related emissions and local pollution. Curbing excessive energy consumption reduces greenhouse gas emissions and local pollution. Improving the rule of law (CHN, MEX, IDN, RUS, SVK) and enhancing the efficiency of public administration (GRC, HUN). Favourable effects as long as the tax preferences encouraging polluting behaviour (e.g. coal heating) are scrapped while those on cleaner activities (e.g. commuting by public transport) are maintained. Competition may promote entry of more energy-efficient suppliers and use of cleaner technologies, provided that appropriate environmental regulation and pricing are in place. However, lower prices due to competition can increase energy consumption and use of network services (rebound effect). Better infrastructure eases congestion and can reduce transport-related emissions, improve energy efficiency, environmental performance and quality of utility services (e.g. better water quality, lower network losses, improved waste management). However, provision of new infrastructure can increase demand, resulting in higher emissions. Infrastructure construction can cause the deterioration of landscapes such as deforestation. Less strict zoning regulation (e.g. for retailers) can improve traffic patterns, reducing congestion. However, de-regulation of land-use can result in degradation of the environment such as deforestation or destruction of eco‑systems. Can reduce or increase car commuting and resulting emissions, e.g. depending on people’s preferences in residential location (near workplace or far). de facto Challenges in assessing the environmental consequences of growth‑enhancing structural reforms Going for Growth 2013 The national framework of structural reforms versus the spatial nature of environmental effects – environmental effects can be local, national or global, while the growth-enhancing recommendations focus on national policies. The negative impacts of growth on the environment can be mitigated by environmental policies. More stringent environmental policies raise the cost of polluting or environmentally damaging behaviour, encouraging mitigation efforts and cleaner production and consumption. They are therefore intended to secure benefits of longer term wellbeing and the sustainability of growth. An immediate question is whether this needs to be done at the expense of growth itself, particularly in the short to medium term. In this respect, there is no consensus (see Ambec et al., 2013; Kozluk and Zipperer, 2014). On the one hand, environmental policies are often thought to hinder economic growth by imposing additional costs and restricting output, inputs and technologies. On the other hand, well-designed environmental policies can actually boost growth and competitiveness, by making use of previously overlooked opportunities to raise efficiency (Porter, 1991; Porter and van der Linde, 1995). Recent OECD evidence linking multifactor productivity growth to changes in environmental policy stringency (EPS) suggests no harm to aggregate productivity growth from tighter environmental policies (Albrizio et al., 2014). Evidence on the link between environmental policies and productivity growth (including the design aspects of environmental policies and the indicators of environmental policies) cited in this section is based on the joint work of the Economics Department and Environment Directorate (Albrizio et al., 2014). At the industry and firm levels, impacts depend on technological advancement – more productive firms tend to see a boost in productivity growth while less advanced ones are likely to see a temporary fall ( ). Highly productive firms may be best suited to profit rapidly from changing conditions – through seizing new market opportunities, rapidly deploying new technologies or reaping previously overseen efficiency gains. The effects may also take place through outsourcing and relocating some of the production abroad, in response to the increased costs of activity. At the same time, the positive effect for the most productive firms is likely to be reinforced by their technological advancement, as they can draw on the most advanced technologies and are likely to have more resources to invest into R&amp;D, for instance, in general anticipation of tightening. Less technologically-advanced firms may need higher investments to comply with the new regulation, for instance adopting cleaner technologies or exchanging equipment, implying a temporary fall in productivity growth. The results also suggest that part of the adjustment, particularly for less technologically-advanced firms, may take the form of firm exit. The exit of the least efficient firms would raise overall industry productivity, cancelling out the negative productivity effects observed in surviving less efficient firms. 1) One year effects of a median increase in environmental policy stringency, i.e. 0.12 change in the value of the EPS index in one single year (annual equivalent of tightening policies from the level in Italy or Greece to that of the Nordic countries). Effects are estimated to last for three years after the policy change and then fade away. No lead effect is found. 2) High (low) pollution intensity is defined as an industry with the highest (lowest) pollution intensity on seven selected key pollutants with respect to value added. 3) High productivity is defined as the country-industry pair (or firm) on or close to the estimated global industry (or firm) productivity frontier. Low productivity is defined as country-industry pair (or firm) at the 75th percentile of distance to the global industry (or firm) productivity frontier. 90% confidence intervals are reported. Albrizio, S. et al. (2014), , No. 1176, Stringent environmental policies are necessary for achieving environmental objectives, but a number of specific features of environmental policies may affect economic outcomes (Johnstone and Hascic, 2009; de Serres et al., 2010): – the extent to which a policy instrument gives continued incentives to search for cheaper abatement options (e.g. via innovation). – the extent to which the policy leaves room for the firm (or consumer) to choose how to reach the environmental objective, less prescriptive policy interventions being better suited to accommodate new ideas, innovation and technology adoption. – the consistency, credibility and clarity of the current and future policy signal can affect investment, innovation and eventually productivity growth. Certainty on future pricing of a particular externality provides stronger incentives to adopt long‑term abatement strategies. To a large extent, the importance of the design of environmental policies for economic outcomes has yet to be documented empirically. The flexibility and predictability arguments have hardly been assessed empirically, while issues of competition friendliness have possibly been given the least attention. Overall, the competition burdens of environmental policies can be expected to have similar effects as the well-documented general anti-competition regulation – such as that measured by the product market regulation indicators (Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2003; Arnold et al., 2008). More flexible, market-based instruments are found to bring about a more robust rebound in MFP growth. This backs up the argument that market-based instruments should be preferred where possible. The finding is also well in line with the pro-growth recommendations on switching from highly distortive taxation (e.g. on labour) to a greater reliance on environmental taxes. The indirect impact on the economy may, however, be significant: a large amount of inputs into other sectors come from industries and sectors that are associated with high-environmental impacts, for example energy and transport. Studies of regulatory impact show that regulations impacting on competition and entry in a specific sector tend to trickle through the entire economy (Barone and Cingano, 2011; Bourles et al., 2013). Moreover, a number of the high environmental impact sectors are open to international trade and thus concerned directly with international competitiveness (OECD, 2006). The BEEP indicator is based on a questionnaire and captures the state of implementation and design of environmental policies at the beginning of 2013. Since then, countries may have introduced reforms that could have affected their performance on the indicator. For example, Spain has reformed several laws (among them the Law on Environmental Assessment) aiming at reducing the burden for citizens and companies while maintaining environmental protection. Examples of common aspects of environmental policies that can provide advantages to incumbent firms include high administrative burdens to new entry; vintage differentiated regulations, where new firms are subject to stricter environmental limits; subsidies or other benefits (e.g. public procurement) for a historical environmental record or improvements (which new firms may not be able to show even if being cleaner than older firms); tax breaks for investments in improving environmental performance (which new firms, that do not yet have profits, may not be able to benefit from) and grandfathering of licenses and permits. Hence, the indicator summarises information on administrative burdens on entry, such as the complexity and design of environmental permit and licensing procedures; the use of environmental regulations that directly impede competition and favour incumbents over new entrants in various ways; and the extent to which economic considerations are (or are not) taken into account when designing, implementing and conducting environmental policies. The results show wide cross‑country differences ( Responses are scored and aggregated within each category and among categories. Equal weights are used at each level. The final scale is 0 to 6, where 0 is the most friendly to competition: lowest administrative burdens, least use of policies that directly impede competition (favouring incumbents), and well-established practices of evaluation of economic effects of environmental policies – both for new policy proposals as well as for the existing policy setup. For the United States, it was not possible to establish a value for the question on the maximum legal length of permitting procedures. A middle-range value was assumed to enable comparison on overall indicator values. Albrizio, S. et al. (2014), , No. 1176, High barriers to entry and competition, increased market concentration and risks of anti‑competitive behaviour may be by-products of environmental policies, but appropriate policy design can minimise these adverse effects. An important finding from comparing the BEEP indicator with measures of EPS is that the competition dimension of environmental policies is not related to their stringency ( ). Across OECD countries, there are examples of relatively stringent environmental policies coupled with low barriers to entry and competition (Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the United Kingdom), and examples of relatively low EPS but where environmental policies would benefit from being made more pro-competitive and flexible (Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Portugal and Spain). Albrizio, S. et al. (2014), , No. 1176, ten years after: Taking a longer perspective on reform action This chapter provides an overview of reform activity since the early 2000s in the policy areas covered by the regular set of indicators featured in in 2005, the pace of structural reforms has remained roughly constant on average across OECD countries, with the exception of a notable acceleration in 2011-12. For a majority of countries, actions taken have often been too modest to lead to the complete removal of the corresponding policy recommendations. For around half of the countries, at least four of the five policy areas identified as priorities in 2007 still prevail in 2015. A higher turnover of priorities has been observed among some of the countries that have been reforming more actively (Australia, Greece, Portugal and the Slovak Republic). Overall, structural reforms implemented since the early 2000s have contributed to raising the level of potential gross domestic product (GDP) per capita by around 5%, with most of the gains coming from higher productivity. Further reform towards best practice could further raise potential GDP per capita by up to 10% on average across OECD countries, depending on the degree of their ambitions. , governments in most OECD countries are still struggling to bring their economies back to the growth path that prevailed around 2005. The headwinds are impressive, and include adverse demographics, persistently high unemployment or falling labour force participation, slowing productivity, high public debts and deficits and the lingering effects of the financial crisis which still affect the functioning of the financial sector. Addressing these challenges requires commensurate and steady policy changes. While the crisis has prompted significant reforms, this chapter takes stock of the changes in the many policy areas covered in Going for Growth Since 2005, every second year has delivered policy priorities and concrete recommendations for each individual OECD member country, the European Union and, since 2010, for Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, Indonesia and China (BRIICS). This has been a complement to the A retrospective assessment of reforms in OECD countries The overview of structural reforms undertaken by OECD countries during the last decade relies to a large extent on information that has been featured in The changes in the policy indicators, across countries and over the last decade – with latest data generally referring to the year 2013. ). This section first reviews the extent to which OECD countries have followed up on recommendations since 2007 Given that the set of indicator-based priority areas was substantially enlarged in 2007 (with notably the introduction of indicators of innovation policies), this is used as a starting point for assessing reform responsiveness and the evolution of priorities over time. take a value of one if allows a comprehensive coverage of all reforms undertaken in priority areas since 2007. By contrast, some quantitative policy indicators lack information that would better reflect the cost-effectiveness of policy settings or programmes. Such is the case of active labour market policies, support to innovation and more generally the provisions of public services. The is up-to-date and allows tracking reforms in real time, including most recent (2014) information on early stages of reforms. On the contrary, not all quantitative policy indicators are available on a timely basis. Some of them rely on country responses to detailed questionnaires (like product market regulation indicators), which can take some time to be completed and reviewed by the OECD; currently the latest vintage is 2013 for most of the indicators. De facto de jure de jure de facto OECD countries appear to have followed up on recommendations to a greater extent in labour productivity-enhancing reforms than in labour utilisation-enhancing ones since 2007, but overall differences between the two areas are relatively narrow ( Over time, reform activity has gone through distinct phases. During the recession (2009‑10), reform activity slowed relative to the pre-crisis period (2007-08), reflecting the more urgent focus on macroeconomic stabilisation. The slowdown was visible in most areas (the most notable exceptions being tax structure, labour regulation and labour costs). Then, the aftermath of the crisis (2011-12) saw reform action accelerating significantly, with the bounce-back being strongest in labour productivity-related reforms, as well as in social protection (in part under the pressure of fiscal consolidation) and active labour market policies to cope with the sharp and persistent rise in unemployment following the recession. However, the post-crisis pick-up in policy actions appears to be losing steam, with OECD countries showing signs of reform slowdown in almost all areas. Still, the intensity of reform remains on average slightly above its pre-crisis level in product market regulation and tax structure areas, while reforms aimed at boosting labour utilisation occur at a markedly lower pace, notably in the fields of labour taxation and work incentives. Tax system – emphasis on the level of labour tax wedges Tax system – structure and efficiency , Panel A). In 2015, 80% of the countries have at least three policy priorities that were already selected in 2007, while for 25% of the countries, all (i.e. the five) priorities set in 2007 are still featured in 2015. Hence, while actions taken in response to The relatively low turnover also indicates that when action is taken, the extent of reform falls short of what is needed to fully address the weakness. Nonetheless, a comparison of the overall reform intensity across countries over the period 2007-14 ( , Panel B) shows that at least for some of the most active countries, a higher turnover of priorities has been observed (Australia, Greece, Portugal and the Slovak Republic). And in many cases where the priority area is maintained, the nature and orientation of the more specific recommendations has changed over time, reflecting earlier, albeit partial, progress. To get a better feel for the importance of reform actions conducted since the early 2000s, the analysis based on responsiveness rates is complemented by information from the quantitative indicators of policy settings. for country  and policy  at time  is first normalised according to the historical minimum and maximum observed during the period 2000-12 across countries. In particular, the cross-country historical maximum is set as the best practice toward which the position of countries over the years will be gauged. Depending on whether an increase or a decrease in the policy is growth‑enhancing according to the framework, each  This normalisation allows each policy indicators, which now varies between 0 and 100, to measure the distance a country has still to travel in order to achieve what is regarded as the best policy practice, i.e. 100. The scores obtained form then the low-level information of a tree structure, which are then aggregated by broad policy areas into  higher-level composite scores In general, countries have converged toward best practices: that is, countries most distant from best practice in 2000 are the ones that made largest improvements over the period. Areas where strongest convergence has been achieved are also the ones where the magnitude of reforms undertaken has tended to be the highest. Reform actions over the last decade have effectively led to convergence in structural policy settings. This is illustrated in , which shows the changes observed in countries in specific policy areas over the period 2000-12 against the initial level in 2000. Cases of convergence in policy settings are reflected by downward sloping trend lines with slopes equivalent in this setting to a test of convergence. If convergence in structural reforms holds among OECD countries, the composite score of country  in policy area  at time  0 &lt; b &lt; 1 (the negatives of the trend lines’ slopes of is a disturbance term. Testing the condition  b &gt; 0 b = 1 b &lt; 0 b &gt; 1 Changes in policy indicators over the period 2000-12 The slopes of the trend lines, in bold on each graphs, denote (in absolute value) the intensity of convergence that took place (see Endnote 3 for details). best practices in regulatory barriers to competition. This is the case in particular for the scope of state intervention (with an intensity of convergence of 0.84), barriers to entrepreneurship (0.89), and to a lesser extent for barriers to trade and FDI (0.64). As a result, impediments to aggregate productivity and innovation due to unduly restrictive regulations have been significantly reduced over the last decade, and OECD countries are now relatively close for many regulatory aspects covered in the indicators available. Some countries still have a large government influence in firms’ operations (in particular Poland and Turkey). But overall, the pervasiveness of state control decreased in the average OECD country and for most of countries individually. The current stance of regulatory barriers to entrepreneurship is the result of considerable easing over the past 10-15 years in almost all countries. Some are however still lagging behind, or have even reinforced restrictiveness in this field (Turkey and to a lesser extent Belgium, Chile, Luxembourg and Korea). The lowest barriers to entrepreneurship are found in Denmark, the Netherlands, New Zealand and the Slovak Republic. Overall, OECD countries who adopted a more competition-friendly regulatory stance in one of the three areas covered by the product market regulation indicators also improved their stance in the other two areas. Pension systems have also been an area of major reforms since the early 2000s, with small steps towards greater incentives to remain in the workforce taken in several countries. In particular, countries with initially high levels of disincentives to pursue activity at the age of pension eligibility (e.g. Belgium, Greece, Hungary, Italy, France, the Slovak Republic and Sweden) have seen significant improvement in pension settings ( One area where reforms have been more difficult is disability benefit programmes. In many countries, the closure of early routes to retirement and the tightening of eligibility conditions to unemployment insurance have raised the risk of seeing a substantial increase in the number of disability benefit recipients. While the number of recipients remains high in many countries, governments have focused on reducing the flow into disability through improved gate-keeping measures. Among the countries facing a relatively high percentage of population receiving benefits, substantial reductions have been observed in Hungary and Sweden, and to a lesser extent, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. In the provision of income support for the unemployed, the OECD summary measure of net replacement rates indicates that the magnitude of reforms has been fairly modest over the last 15 years ( ). Furthermore, aside from the Slovak Republic and Switzerland, significant reductions took place in countries (such as Australia, Greece, Korea, New Zealand and the United States) where the replacement rate in the initial year of unemployment was not comparatively high in the early 2000s. At the same time, many countries have raised the income replacement rate in the initial year of unemployment, with most substantial increases found in Iceland and Italy. By contrast, reductions in the replacement rate for long-term unemployed have been more widespread and also generally more substantial in countries where the level of support was most generous in the early 2000s (e.g. Denmark, Norway and Slovak Republic). However, reforms in this area have gone well beyond adjustments in replacement rates. In order to reduce disincentives to take-up work, governments have used a mixture of carrots and sticks, combining the tightening of eligibility conditions (e.g. minimum number of work weeks required for entitlement), with the reinforcement of job search requirements and sanctions and the possibility to cumulate benefits and earnings up to a time and threshold limits. In the related area of labour taxes, the widespread increases in deficits and debts following the crisis have made more difficult the pursuit of reductions in labour tax wedges in recent years. While tax wedges have been lowered in a majority of countries since 2000, the reductions have been small in most cases ( , Panel A), little action has been taken over the years to remove tax bias against second earners. In contrast, public expenditure on childcare services (as a ratio of GDP) has risen significantly in a large majority of countries, with particularly large increases observed in Iceland and Sweden and, to a lesser extent, Ireland, Korea, New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom. While this has contributed to increase the provision of childcare services, the net cost for parents depends also on fees as well as benefits in the form of either tax reduction or child-related transfers. Measures affecting the net cost of childcare for lone parents or couples went in different directions. Such costs fell significantly in Korea, Norway and Switzerland, but substantial increases were observed in Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the Slovak Republic ( , Panels B and C). Specific recommendations have been regularly made to increase the level and efficiency of public support to innovation, including regarding the mix between direct and indirect (through tax incentives) support. Since the early 2000s, countries have tended to follow-up on these recommendations and reform activity in this area has been high. However, the mild degree of convergence achieved (0.54) points to relatively low magnitude of reforms. ). But other countries, notably Italy, Mexico and New Zealand, no longer provide indirect support. Reforms in direct support to R&amp;D display an even more scattered pattern, with some countries having markedly reduced their direct support (Germany, France, Israel and Sweden), while others raised it considerably over the period (Austria, Hungary, Korea and Slovenia). Reforms in taxation and labour regulation have results in fairly modest changes in policy settings In line with the relatively low reform activity in the areas of taxation and labour regulation, the respective policy stances have not changed markedly since the early 2000s ( In many countries, too stringent procedures and conditions for lay-offs combined with high severance payments have contributed to the persistence of high unemployment by discouraging hiring. In part to reduce persistence, reforms have initially focused on easing the rules and conditions on fixed-term contracts, creating thereby two-tier regimes of employment protection, with different and asymmetric degrees of restrictions on open‑ended and fixed-term contracts. The greater use of fixed-term contracts has been facilitated through sizeable reforms in Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Portugal, Spain and, more recently Greece and Mexico. But on average, reforms conducted in other countries have been modest. Significant reforms of open-ended contracts have been less widespread, with restrictions eased significantly in Austria, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Japan, Portugal and the Slovak Republic. Yet, large differences remain across countries and the adverse consequences of growing labour market duality, notably in terms of equity and productivity, has stressed the need for narrowing the gap in protection between open‑ended and fixed-term contracts. . In particular, shifting the structure of taxation away from direct taxes toward consumption (and immovable property) has been promoted as a measure to raise efficiency and lift output (see OECD, 2009). While some countries moved to a more favourable tax mix (Belgium, Finland, Germany, Sweden and the United States), most countries left their structure of taxation globally unaltered ( Realised and potential gains from structural reforms in OECD countries A simple framework to measure the impact of structural reforms on output potential A wide body of empirical evidence has been generated over the years on the effects of structural reforms on various aspects of economic performance (see e.g. De Mello and Padoan, 2010; Barnes et al., 2011; Bouis and Duval, 2011). The present analysis aims to provide a stylised quantification of the impact of policies. As a result, it uses a framework that is simpler but also far less elaborate than these alternative approaches. The effect of structural policies on potential GDP per capita is gauged using estimated multipliers for the average OECD country. It starts from potential GDP per capita and its standard decomposition into productivity and labour utilisation components. Each of these terms is normalised through the same procedure as outlined in , i.e. they are transformed so as to range between 0 and 100 according to the cross-country historical minimum and maximum observed between 2000 and 2012 across OECD countries. The impact of structural policies on potential GDP components is then assumed to conform to the following specification: for h = {productivity; labour utilisation} is the growth rate in potential productivity or labour utilisation scores between year  and  for country  is the growth rate of the composite policy score (or the set of policy scores) between year  and  t‑1 for country  in area  is the lag of potential GDP score for country  is a time dummy for the years 2008 and 2009. The equation includes country fixed-effects and is estimated using a clustered correction for standard-errors. The time dummy for the years 2008 and 2009 aims at capturing the effects of the recession on post‑crisis trend in potential output (see OECD, 2014; Ball, 2014). Assuming there are declining marginal gains in closing the gap with best practices, and so that a country moving from a score of 20 to 40 in a given policy area will not achieved the same gains as a country moving from 70 to 90, the econometric specification uses changes in the growth rate of composite policy scores but not changes in score points. The product of the estimated parameters of interest β The simulation framework implies that, across different countries and magnitudes of reforms, the marginal effects of reforms on GDP are homogeneous. It implies also that the simulations provide estimates of the long-run effects of reforms; their short-term dynamics and the transition along the growth paths are not captured (in particular reforms are not assumed to be phased in gradually). Finally, the model also does not consider that actions in different structural policy domains are interconnected and often mutually reinforcing. In particular, it is not possible in such a simple framework to identify the types of transmission channels that can be featured using a general equilibrium approach (e.g. Annicchiarico et al., 2013; Lusinyan and Muir, 2013). [1] [2] [3] [1] [2] [3] The estimated average effects of past structural reforms undertaken between 2000 and 2012 on potential output are sizeable ( ). Indeed, they suggest that once their impact has fully materialised structural reforms will have contributed to raise the level of GDP per capita by around 5%, which is about one-fifth of the observed increase on average across OECD countries between 2000 and 2012. In terms of policy areas, reforms of product market regulation and support to innovation have lifted potential GDP by 4%, while 1% was reaped from labour utilisation-enhancing reforms. This is mostly explained by the strong convergence that took place in product market regulation, an active field of reforms which generated in return significant gains. Lower convergence in labour market policies, due partly to the fact that a number of reforms in this area went in the direction opposite to are estimated to have delivered large output gains. The magnitude of the estimated effects varies widely by country, with countries with the initially least growth-friendly policies having obtained considerable gains from reforming, while some countries with more pro-growth initial policy stance have had smaller estimated gains. However, despite the relatively high degree of convergence achieved since the early 2000s in structural reforms, large untapped gains still prevail, should the convergence process continue further. A recent estimate of the effects of the crisis on productive capacity of OECD countries points to a median loss in the level of potential output of 3.4% in 2014 relative to its pre‑crisis path (see Ollivaud and Turner, 2014 and Ball, 2014 for an alternative estimation). Based on these estimates, most of this drop is attributed to lower productivity and lower capital per worker, and to a lesser extent by lower potential employment. This last factor is mainly due to higher cyclical unemployment which, if it persists, partly translates into higher structural unemployment, as workers lose attachment to the labour force and their skills deteriorate during lengthy spells of inactivity. As a result, a pressing question is whether such effects can be reversed. Notwithstanding its impact on the level of long-term output, for many countries the crisis may not have reduced the potential growth rate, which is currently estimated at close to its old normal, as is the case in the United States (see OECD, 2014). In these countries, the current potential output path is thus below but roughly parallel to the pre-crisis path. However, for some countries such as Ireland and Greece, pre- and post-crisis paths are diverging, reflecting significant differentials in potential output growth. Structural measures could address, and possibly revert, such longer-term consequences of the recession. Based on the estimates reported in the previous section, the overall gains from further convergence in structural policy settings on potential output across the OECD area could be of the order of 3.9 to 9.5% ( best practice would be no more than 50% after reforms, an increase of 3.9% in potential GDP could be achieved on average. In this scenario of mild convergence, gains are achieved through greater support to innovation and a more pro‑labour utilisation stance in labour incentives and taxation, and to a lesser extent by reducing labour costs. No or weak gains can be expected in the remaining policy areas given the degree of convergence already achieved. vis‑à‑vis best practice would not exceed 34% after reforms, the average gain in potential GDP could reach 7.3%. The relative contribution from the various policy areas would be similar to the first scenario except for the gains achieved through additional convergence in product market regulation. Finally, a strong convergence scenario, i.e. where the gaps in policy settings Barriers to trade and FDI Support to innovation Growth in potential labour utilisation Growth in potential productivity Growth in potential GDP per capita Scope of state intervention Barriers to trade and FDI Support to innovation Gains in potential labour utilisation Gains in potential productivity Total gains in potential GDP per capita Scope of state intervention Barriers to trade and FDI Gains in potential labour utilisation Gains in potential productivity Total gains in potential GDP per capita Scope of state intervention Barriers to trade and FDI Support to innovation Gains in potential labour utilisation Gains in potential productivity Total gains in potential GDP per capita Scope of state intervention Barriers to trade and FDI Support to innovation The change in pension wealth is a measure of the incentive to remain in the workforce for an additional period. It measures the increase in the level of pension entitlement one gains by remaining in employment for an additional year. The calculation is the annual average increase in males’ pension wealth when working from age 60 to 64 and age 55-59. Net pension wealth is the present value of the flow of pension benefits, taking account of the taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is measured and expressed as a multiple of gross annual individual earnings in the respective country. See OECD (2013), Pensions at a Glance 2013: OECD and G20 Indicators Simple average of the net replacement rates for the following households situations: single with no child and with two children at 67% and 100% AW, one-earner married couple with no child and with two children at 67% AW and 100% AW. After tax and including unemployment and family benefits. Social assistance and other means-tested benefits are assumed to be available subject to relevant income conditions. Housing costs are assumed equal to 20% of AW. For Panel A, initial phase of unemployment but following any waiting period. Any income taxes payable on unemployment benefits are determined in relation to annualised benefit values (i.e. monthly values multiplied by 12) even if the maximum benefit duration is shorter than 12 months. For Panel B, after tax and including unemployment benefits, social assistance, family and housing benefits in the 60th month of benefit receipt. For Panel B, the minimum cost of labour is expressed as a percentage of labour cost of median worker. The cost of labour is the sum of the wage level and the corresponding social security contribution paid by employers. Panel A: OECD, ; Panel B: OECD, The average tax wedge is measured as the difference between total labour compensation paid by the employer and the net take‑home pay of employees, as a ratio of total labour compensation. It therefore includes both employer and employee social security contributions. The marginal tax wedge is measured as the difference between the change in total labour compensation paid by employers and the change in the net take-home pay of employees, as a result of an extra unit of national currency of labour income. The difference is expressed as a percentage of the change in total labour compensation. For Panel B, childcare expenditure covers children three enrolled in childcare and children between the ages of three and five enrolled in pre-school. Childcare refers to formal day-care services, such as day-care centres and family day-care. Pre-school includes kindergartens and day-care centres which usually provide an educational content as well as traditional care for children (ISCED 0 under UNESCO’s classification system). Local government spending may not be properly captured in the data for federal countries. Panel A: OECD, ; Panel B: OECD, ; Panel C: OECD, Panel A: OECD, ; Panel B: OECD, Over the past decade, per capita income surpassed the average of the most advanced OECD countries, helped by high terms of trade and employment rates. However, productivity gains have been weak and the economy faces a period of adjustment in the wake of the mining boom. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Data refer to 2012 for Australia. OECD = 100. The variance components in mathematics, sciences and reading were estimated for all students in participating countries with data on socio-economic background and study programmes. The variance in student performance is calculated as the square of the standard deviation of PISA scores in reading, mathematics and science for the sample of students used in the analysis. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed Going for Growth 2015 The 2014-15 Budget foresees reduction of the corporate tax rate by 1.5 percentage-points and the reintroduction of indexation of excise on vehicle fuels. Enrolment rates in pre-primary education are relatively low. Children from disadvantaged backgrounds face severe educational and skills shortfalls. Further development of universal early childhood education was agreed by national and state governments in April 2013 (the National Partnership on Universal Access to Early Childhood Education). Reform of school funding is underway (the Gonski reform), including introduction of an allocation formula that gives greater weight to socio‑economic factors. The 2014-15 Budget foresees the creation of the Entrepreneurs’ Infrastructure Program (EIP). One component of the EIP is , which provides a brokering service to link SMEs with research organisations and grants of up to ASD 50 000 to engage researchers. Fiscal conditions allowing, add new mechanisms for boosting collaboration between business and academia, e.g. innovation vouchers for academic contracting. Ensure that these measures incorporate the local context in which they are implemented, that they are simple to use and effectively advertised with efficient brokering. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 Past recommendations suggested a wider application of lighter screening procedures for foreign-direct investment (as already applied to inward investment from the United States) and to enhance the transparency of such procedures. Lighter procedures have applied to New Zealand since March 2013 and are in the pipeline for Korea, Japan and Chile; the rule-based screening system is no longer considered a major impediment to growth potential. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2004-12 for Australia. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 In March 2014, the Austrian Parliament approved a minor reduction of employers’ social security contributions by 0.1 pp from July 2014 and an additional 0.1 pp by January 2015. Reduce the lowest income tax rate as announced in the government’s work programme. Partly or fully waive social security contributions, financed by a further broadening of the tax base and increases in consumption, environmental and recurrent property taxes. Restrictions to early retirement and invalidity pension schemes adopted in previous years came into force on 1 January 2014. Pension eligibility requirements for the long-term insured have been further tightened. The temporary invalidity pension has been abolished for those below the age of 50 and replaced by medical and job-related rehabilitation for those aged 50 and above. These reforms progressively dilute the former early retirement rules ( Bring the official retirement age for women in line with that for men. Eliminate all remaining subsidised avenues to early retirement. Tighten eligibility to disability pensions also for those above 50 and help partially-disabled workers to better use their remaining work capacity. Reflect changes in life expectancy more directly in the parameters of the pension system. No action taken in 2013-14. Progress has been achieved since 2012 with the unbundling of gas and electricity transmission system operators (TSO) into independent transmission operators (ITO). Cross-border and cross-regional integration of networks have been pursued. In the gas market, the authorities have introduced an entry-exit system with centralised virtual trading points that replaces the system based on contractually agreed transport paths. Several proactive initiatives have been launched by the Consumer Information Association (VKI) and the Austrian Energy Regulator (E-Control) to better inform households and businesses about switching opportunities in the gas and electricity markets. Educational and career guidance as well as orientation measures have been extended. In March 2013, an amendment to a university law was enacted, which allows universities to limit the number of students in highly demanded fields by introducing selection processes. Simultaneously, 95 new professorships are created in these fields. Further, the government will create 4 000 additional study places at Universities of Applied Science in order to attenuate supply shortages. For Austria, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 In October 2013, the federal government agreed on several measures to reduce labour costs, in particular for SMEs and companies that hire young unemployed people, albeit the amounts involved are rather small. The important reductions in social security contributions outlined in the 2013 Job search monitoring was intensified in 2013 for newly unemployed people aged between 50 and 55 years and for recent graduates. Shorten the period during which benefits are gradually decreasing towards their final level and lower the generous ceiling for higher income workers. Start earlier with activation during the unemployment spell, especially through job-search assistance, and widen the definition of suitable jobs as the spell gets longer. Replace age‑related exemptions from job-search obligations by individual assessments of work capacity. No action taken on wage bargaining. Nevertheless, in early 2014 the price index used for automatic wage adjustments was revised to better reflect changes in consumption patterns. In addition, wage indexation will be temporarily suspended in 2015. The 2013 revision of the pension bonus ensured consistency with the gradual tightening of early retirement rules agreed in 2012 and has somewhat increased incentives for longer careers. Costs of switching gas and electricity suppliers have been cut and contract termination penalties were abolished, which led to markedly higher competition since early 2013. However, regional regulators have become responsible for setting and enforcing distribution tariffs, which causes further regulatory fragmentation. For Belgium, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-10 for Belgium. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The narrowing of significant GDP per capita gap with OECD countries has stagnated mainly due to comparatively weak labour productivity performance. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The Authorities have simplified the procedures for public works with a view to shortening the tender process (2013). Concession contracts have been expanded (2013). A new ports law is expected to enhance investment. 76% of planned investments for 2011‑14 under the Growth Acceleration Pact (PAC2) had been spent by end-2013, but there have been delays in project delivery. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 Reduce fragmentation and complexity of the tax system. Unify state‑level indirect tax rates and tax bases. equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) database. This data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. Due to data limitations, income levels across the distribution are derived by combining quintile income shares from nationally representative household surveys and gross national income of the household sector from the national accounts. This implies limited comparability with OECD countries’ data. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: World Bank, GDP per capita remains above the average of the upper half of OECD countries while labour productivity gap persists. Higher terms of trade have pushed GDI per capita above the average. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 In June 2014, the federal government has capped wireless operators’ wholesale roaming rates at the levels charged on average to their retail customers. In 2013, Prince Edward Island replaced its provincial sales tax (PST) with the Harmonised Sales Tax (HST). The Québec Sales Tax was further harmonised with the HST but British Columbia exited the HST and returned to a PST. A government website providing easily accessible information linking fields of study to labour-market outcomes became operational in 2014. The immigration application management system was reformed in 2014 (with effect from 2015) to give priority to qualified potential immigrants with skills in demand. In 2014, Ontario entered into contracts with its tertiary institutions that encourage them to specialise. The government introduced in 2013 the Venture Capital Action Plan, which will strengthen the venture capital market and increase risk financing available to innovative firms. In 2014, the government established the Canada First Research Excellence Fund, which will support research in post-secondary institutions in strategic fields for Canada. For Canada, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Progress has been made in the area of human capital. However, further improvements in the educational system and easier regulatory procedures for businesses are needed to increase productivity and reduce the income gap with other OECD countries. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 A major educational reform was announced in 2014. Measures include ending public funding to private, for-profit schools; making all primary and secondary education free of charge; prohibiting selective practices in the admission processes of schools receiving state funding; and facilitating access to high-quality tertiary education for low-income groups. Simplify regulatory laws. Increase the level of fines and make price fixing a criminal offence to improve enforcement of the competition law. Improve co‑ordination across regulatory agencies and monitor their effectiveness. Lowering severance pay for regular workers can reduce labour market segmentation by e.g. increasing youth employment, while extending unemployment benefits can enhance labour market efficiency. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 countries at similar levels of development, facilitate industry and research linkages, and promote public‑private co-ordination to exploit natural endowments. Expand government financial support for advanced degrees in fields with substantial technological content (such as engineering and science), as scarcity of qualified workers in these areas limits R&amp;D investment. The administration is planning to open 4 500 new childcare institutions for children under three years of age during the next four years. Of these, over 500 institutions were already created in 2014. For Chile, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) database. This data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2006-11 for Chile. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, GDP per capita continued to catch up with that of the upper half of OECD over 2008-13, although it grew at a slower pace than in the preceding five years. The income gap is attributable to lower output per worker as participation rates are above those in OECD countries. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The Third Plenum of the Chinese Communist Party in November 2013 emphasised that markets should be given a greater role in all areas of economic activity. At the National People’s Congress in March 2014, a number of sectors (such as railways and small financial institutions) were announced to open up to private investment. At the same time, the Shanghai Free Trade Zone adopted a , i.e. a list of sectors where participation of foreign capital is prohibited, on a trial basis. Between May 2013 and July 2014, around one fourth of administrative requirements (e.g. firms’ registration and licensing) were removed or delegated to sub-national governments, making the regulatory approval system more efficient and transparent. The Ministry of Education announced in early 2014 that greater emphasis will be put on applied skills versus academic education in universities run by sub-national governments. In June 2014, a decision on strengthening vocational education was adopted by the ministry. Its measures include reconverting many universities at the province level to vocational colleges with a view to better match labour market needs. Following the removal of the floor on lending rates on 20 July 2013, the agenda for interest rate liberalisation has been set with clear timelines for the first time and measures to rein in off-balance sheet lending have borne fruit. An additional group of sub-national governments have been authorised to issue bonds by a decree from the Ministry of Finance on May 2014, thereby reducing their demand for bank financing. The revised Budget Law allows for debt issuance by province-level governments for welfare-related capital spending subject to a quota approved by the National People’s Congress. Education services have been progressively extended to migrant families: a growing number of cities are granting free access to compulsory education to migrants’ children; some cities are allowing them to attend high school and sit for the college entrance exam. Health care services have been extended to migrant workers to varying degrees in cities across the country, albeit the private contribution rates are higher when migrants use the service in cities where they are not registered. Since the new leadership took power in March 2013, non-compliers have been subject to more investigations and fines. Large-scale corruption cases have been publicised to deter potential abuse of power. The Fourth Plenum of the Chinese Communist Party in October 2014 has given priority to enhancing the rule of law, including by strengthening the independence of the judicial system. For China, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) database. This data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. Due to data limitations, income levels across the distribution are derived by combining quintile income shares from nationally representative household surveys on consumption expenditures and gross national income of the household sector from the national accounts. This implies limited comparability with OECD countries’ data and generally an underestimation of inequality compared to measures based on income. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-10 for China. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: World Bank, Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per employee and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, ; and Colombia, Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística (DANE). Going for Growth 2015 ex ante cost-benefit analysis and evaluation of PPP projects, especially at the sub-national level (in the prioritisation, planning and structuring phases). Carry out environmental and social assessments – including consultation processes – before granting contracts. Further develop Colombia’s large potential for multimodal transport to reduce transport costs and environmental degradation. Despite their reduction in the 2012 tax reform, non‑wage labour costs are still high pushing many people into unemployment or informality. This is partly due to the reliance on social security contributions and non-tax compulsory fees to finance some redistributive policies. Consider changing the tax mix by reducing contributions and fees and financing social expenditures with less distortive taxes such as property and environmental ones and broadening VAT and income tax bases. Lower other non-tax compulsory employer payments. Convert some social schemes (e.g.  Cajas de Compensación Familiar Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. Due to data limitations, income levels across the distribution are derived by combining quintile income shares from nationally representative household surveys and gross national income of the household sector from the national accounts. This implies limited comparability with OECD countries’ data. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: World Bank, leading OECD economies has remained unchanged since 2007, reflecting a marked deceleration of labour productivity that more than overshadowed higher capital intensity. The income convergence process could be restarted by reducing barriers to competition, removing obstacles to female labour market participation and moving towards a more growth-friendly tax system (i.e. relying more on consumption and green taxes and less on labour taxes). Reforms to raise female labour market participation and equity in education would reduce income inequality, as well as boosting growth. Green and growth-friendly tax reforms could lower the economy’s high energy reliance and thus CO The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Upper half of OECD countries in terms of PISA score in reading. Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 Tax deductions were introduced to support workplace training in 2014. The Government approved the Education Policy Strategy 2020, a policy framework aiming at enhancing quality of education in general and specifically addressing equity in education. Parts of the Strategy have entered the legislative phase. Phase out early streaming. Increase employers’ participation in vocational training by simplifying the institutional framework and governance of vocational education and training (VET). Review the effectiveness of the recently-introduced training incentives in terms of encouraging employers to provide training to young unskilled workers and VET students experiencing difficulty finding work placements. Attract and retain high‑quality personnel in schools with pupils from low socio-economic background. Secure quality and resources for tertiary education by introducing output-based accreditation criteria for university staff and student fees, accompanied by a system of means-tested grants and income-contingent repayment loans. In 2014, legislation was passed to increase the scope of childcare facilities, by encouraging provision from parents’ employers, churches, municipalities, foundations and universities. At the same time, the authorities introduced a tax credit for pre-school care and education expenses (up to an amount equivalent to the minimum wage per child and per year). No action taken. Backward steps took place in 2014 by abandoning both the planned The current co-operation programme between enterprises and higher education institutions is planned to be continued over the period 2014-20. In 2014, the tax deduction for R&amp;D business spending increased from 100% to 110% for new spending compared with the previous tax period. A 2012-15 project was launched to create a new system for evaluation and financing of research, development and innovation. Reforms introduced in April 2012 raised the effectiveness of surveillance of public procurement procedures, by: i) requiring the contracting authority to publish tender documentation and the price actually paid; and ii) introducing sub-contractors in public procurement. Nevertheless, adequate support for the administration of the procedures is critical. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The corporate tax rate is being gradually reduced: it has been cut from 25% in 2013 to 24.5% in 2014 and should reach 22% in 2016. The share of the working-age population receiving disability and sickness benefits is relatively high, reducing labour utilisation. This situation partly reflects institutional weaknesses; for example that disability benefits are granted on a permanent basis for those above 40 years old. In early 2013, a new rehabilitation model replaced the disability benefit scheme, emphasising integrated health and employment services and reducing the number of people entitled to a permanent disability benefit. Individuals receiving sickness benefits now have their case reassessed after five months to determine if they can be reintegrated into the labour force. As from March 2013, the penalties for individuals and businesses that are members of cartels have been raised significantly. Competition for contracts relating to public sector works, services and supplies has been promoted by reducing rules and improving the guidance relating to tendering processes. In April 2013, the state grant system for tertiary education was reformed to speed up course completion. In 2013 the first phase of a plan to improve vocational education and training (VET) programmes was implemented, including the establishment of 50 placement centres nationwide. In February 2014, the government reached a broad political agreement to introduce entry requirements for admission to VET programmes and talent tracks for the most talented students, as well as a guaranteed minimum of 26 hours of teaching per week from 2016. The tax deductibility of mortgage interest is being made less generous, decreasing gradually from 30.5% to 25.5% by 2020 for interest costs that exceed DKK 50 000. For Denmark, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, the upper half of OECD countries is substantial. This gap in living standards reflects a shortfall in productivity, where convergence has slowed. Labour market participation is high, but structural unemployment remains elevated. Spending on activation policies has been increased but remains low. The tax wedge on labour has been reduced, but efforts should be pursued in this area, especially for low-pay workers. The new means‑tested student support system should facilitate access to tertiary education. Improving vocational education and training (VET) as well as access to tertiary education, encouraging business innovation, and addressing shortfalls in energy market regulation would reduce the productivity gap. Strengthening active labour market policies and reducing the labour tax wedge for low‑wage earners would help combating structural unemployment. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Spending on activation policies increased in 2014, but remains low in international comparison. New active labour market programmes were introduced in 2014, targeted at risk groups, e.g. the long-term unemployed and youth. The unemployment insurance contribution rate was reduced, from 4.2% to 3% in 2013 and to 2.4% at the beginning of 2015. The income tax-free allowance was raised, from EUR 145 to EUR 154 in 2014. The flat income tax rate will be reduced from 21% to 20% in 2015. Exemptions from VAT for privately used company cars will be limited and the efficiency of VAT tax collection raised. Tobacco and alcohol taxes were increased between 2013 and 2015. However, taxation of the land underneath detached houses was abolished in 2013. The government adopted a new smart specialisation strategy in 2013. It identifies three priority areas for growth: information and communications technology, healthcare and more efficient use of resources. Responsibilities for R&amp;D policies were clarified and co-ordination across ministries was strengthened. Indicators were developed to measure the effectiveness of innovation policies. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 A task force was set up in 2014 to develop policy tools aimed at improving the matching between supply and demand of skills. Recent reforms in this area have focused on e.g. increasing practitioners’ involvement into vocational education and promoting entrepreneurship training. A new means-tested grant system for university students was launched in 2013. For Estonia, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, The six non-EU OECD countries with the lowest barriers to entry in professional services and retail trade in Panel A and with the lowest producer support to agriculture in Panel B. For this measure, EU refers to all 27 members of the European Union. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 Implement the EU Horizon 2020 framework programme for research and innovation to simplify procedures and strengthen the links between research institutions and businesses. Reinforce initiatives that reduce administrative burdens for enterprises. Identify and support best bankruptcy practices, such as laws that do not overly penalise failure. Strengthen co-operation in favour of lifelong learning and high-quality education and training. The public procurement legislative package, designed to streamline procurement tendering procedures, was adopted in 2014. The agreement on the Common Agricultural Policy reached in 2013 provides for better targeting of funds to active farmers and phasing out of production volumes. In 2013, the EU Commission proposed the Fourth Railway Package, which aims to open domestic passenger railways to new entrants and services. The Commission also set out proposals to ease customs formalities for shipping. In 2014, the European Parliament voted legislation to move further towards a Single Telecoms Market. Remove barriers to labour mobility within the European Union Labour mobility in the European Union is still restrained by regulation, contributing to high unemployment while hampering the allocation of resources to where they are most productive. In 2014 a directive on the free movement of labour was adopted that aims to reduce difficulties faced by mobile citizens to get information and assistance in EU host countries and another one on the acquisition and preservation of supplementary pension rights. Essential reform initiatives have been taken, and their implementation is under way. This concerns mainly the establishment of single supervisory and resolution mechanisms in banking, including single rule books and a common resolution funds. A comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets is ongoing, and equity capital requirements are being tightened. The main task is now to make the new regulatory framework operational. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The GDP per capita gap relative to leading OECD economies has widened since 2007 as productivity and hours worked have fallen. The continued deterioration in the terms of trade further weighs on GDI per capita. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The resources of the competition authority have been increased in 2013 to ensure that it can fulfil its mandate. A review of the current Land use and building act has been carried out. The youth guarantee was put in place in 2013, whereby those below 25 and recent graduates under the age of 30 are offered a job or a study place, a work trial or workshop place within three months of registering as unemployed. From 2014, people unemployed for three months are being offered jobs beyond their initial profession and sanctions for refusing activation measures should be applied more consistently. From 2014, unemployed jobseekers may earn EUR 300 per month without losing unemployment benefits. Over 2013 and 2014, resources to accelerate return to work have been expanded in the area of: i) vocational education and training (VET); and ii) employment services targeted at requalifying the long-term unemployed. No action has been taken on income replacement rates. VAT rates were increased by one percentage point at the beginning of 2013. Excise duties were also raised. In 2014, property assessment has come closer to market values. The social partners have moved forward on reforming the earnings-related pension system. The reform is planned to be effective as of 2017. Changes include a progressive increase in the statutory retirement age, from currently 63 to 65 years in 2025 and, thereafter in relation to life expectancy. According to estimates, the planned reform would raise the effective retirement age to 62.4 years by 2025. In the next step, the government prepares new legislation for parliamentary approval. For Finland, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-12 for Finland. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The gap in GDP per capita relative to the leading OECD countries remains sizeable, reflecting low employment rates of young and older people as well as low hours worked. The tax burden on labour has been significantly reduced through a tax credit and a reduction of social contributions in 2013-14, and further social contributions cuts are targeted at low and medium wages. In the area of professional training, additional funds have been earmarked to low-skilled and unemployed workers. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, At 100% of average earnings for the first earner and average of the three situations regarding the wage of the second earner (0%, 33% and 67% of average earnings). Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 A simplification of part-time unemployment schemes was introduced in 2013. In 2014, the time span between a job loss and unemployment benefit payment has been increased for laid-off workers who receive large severance pay packages. Make open-ended contracts more flexible (extend the trial period, broaden the definition of economic redundancy and shorten layoffs and judicial procedures). Make sure that every jobseeker receives an employment or training offer within a few months, evaluate and streamline ALMPs, and apply sanctions in case of a jobseeker’s refusal of good offers. The corporate tax credit introduced in 2013 is broadly equivalent to a reduction of labour taxation by 4% of the gross wage bill in 2013 and 6% from 2014 onwards (excluding salaries higher than 2.5 times the minimum wage). This has been financed by spending cuts and increases in VAT and environmental taxes. The Responsibility and Solidarity pact voted in 2014 foresees further reductions in social charges worth EUR 10 billion over 2015-17, equally distributed between low and medium wages. Lower social security contributions further by shifting the financing of benefits that accrue to society at large, such as those for families, to less distortive taxes (e.g. environmental, real property and inheritance taxes). Eliminate tax loopholes, such as preferential tax treatment of certain investment income, and broaden the base of personal, capital and corporate income taxation. The government is increasing education staff by 60 000 over 2012-15. It created more posts in early childhood education and is working to focus initial training for teachers more on pedagogical and practical skills. The extension of the school week from 4 to 4.5 days in 2013 and 2014 and pedagogical innovations allow for more individualised support for pupils. Combat school failure at an early stage, limit grade repetition drastically, and develop individualised instruction. Improve teachers’ training by focusing on knowledge transmission and creativity, and boost incentives to attract high-quality teachers in disadvantaged schools. The government launched an initiative to simplify regulation in 2013 and announced 50 additional measures for enterprises in 2014, notably to limit the burden of new regulations and ease fiscal procedures. However, the integration of the rail network manager (RFF) with the national railway company’s infrastructure branch may hamper future network access for alternative rail operators. A 2013 law on higher education aims to double the number of students combining work and study by 2020. The 2014 reform of professional training directs more money at low-skilled workers and the unemployed. It creates a personal training account and aims to strengthen orientation services. For France, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Länder Removing policy-induced disincentives for women to take-up full-time jobs and reducing the labour tax wedge would raise overall employment and hours worked. Reducing educational inequalities and the gap in job protection between regular and non-regular workers would encourage human capital accumulation and raise workers’ employability. Removing barriers to competition in services would boost productivity growth. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Social security contributions were lowered by 0.6 percentage points in 2013. However, more generous pension entitlements introduced in 2014 are expected to raise contributions by 0.4 percentage points by 2030. The basic income tax allowance was raised somewhat in 2013. ). Germany has de-regulated long-distance bus services as of January 2013. Länder Continue reducing early tracking. Reduce the assignment of pupils to special needs schools. Provide more financial resources to schools with a comparatively high share of pupils with weak socio-economic background. Improve the transition to mainstream vocational education for youth at risk of dropping out. Reduce grade repetition. Give consideration to raising the maximum amount of means-tested student support. Develop tuition fees in combination with student loans with income contingent repayments. The number of childcare places was increased and a legal claim for parents on public care for children aged one year or more was introduced in 2013. Some Länder have established training courses for early childhood educators. The government has widened the scope to combine part-time work with parental leave benefits from 2015 onwards. Backward action took place in 2013: the introduction of a cash-for-care subsidy for parents who decide not to use childcare facilities has been reducing incentives to work. Continue expanding the supply of full-day childcare. Improve the quality of early childhood education and care by raising the staff-to-children ratio in accredited facilities, by further raising professionals’ qualifications and by better integrating education and care. Abolish the cash-for-care subsidy. Reform the system of joint taxation and give consideration to removing free health insurance for non-working spouses, while ensuring that low-income households are compensated. For Germany, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2004-11 for Germany. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, After narrowing steadily until 2008, the gap in GDP per capita relative to best performing OECD countries has since steadily widened as labour productivity and labour utilisation have sharply declined. Priority should be given to ensuring that the multiple reforms introduced in the recession and recovery context are being fully implemented. Further reforms are also needed, notwithstanding the progress achieved. Improvements in active labour market policies and the social safety net are needed to address the labour market and social consequences of the crisis. More needs to be done in the area of product markets to unleash growth potential via, e.g. a more efficient allocation of resources. Reforms to raise the efficiency of taxation and of public administration are also important for productivity and would help fiscal consolidation. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, . For further details see Koske, I., I. Wanner, R. Bitetti and O. Barbiero (2015), The 2013 update of the OECD product market regulation indicators: Policy insights for OECD and non‑OECD countries Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The modernisation of the Public Employment Services (PES) is underway, aiming at a new operational model with greater focus on individual needs and programme monitoring. A 2013 law upgrades vocational education and apprenticeships. A pilot minimum income scheme was enacted in 2014. Reforms in customs procedures under the 2013-15 National Strategy for Trade Facilitation have reduced red tape for exports. A framework law has been approved in 2014 with a view to overhauling licensing procedures for business setup and investment. More recently, a law was passed to promote competition in four key sectors, including tourism and retail trade. Many regulated professions have been opened up, for example in the areas of law, accounting and engineering. As of 2013, Sunday shopping has been allowed up to seven times per year. The liberalisation and reform of the electricity and gas markets are underway, including ownership unbundling of the electricity transmission company and privatisation measures. Privatisation is also being pursued in other industries (e.g. ports, regional airports and railways). In secondary education, curricula have been made more flexible and an evaluation policy of schools and teachers is underway. In higher education, a first wave of institutional consolidation has been completed – to reduce duplication – and an external evaluation system is under preparation. was developed in 2013 to address chronic staffing allocation problems in the public sector. A new system for recruiting managers is currently being legislated, while steps were also taken to improve the current evaluation system of civil servants. The reorganisation of ministries and public entities is underway. Proceed swiftly with establishing an evaluation system of staff performance based on clear individual objectives. Enhance further the development of e‑government. Tax evasion is widespread, hampering an effective revenue collection and raising social concerns about an unfairly distributed of tax burden. Reforms in 2013-14 simplified the tax system and broadened its base, including by removing several deductions and credits of the personal income tax, reducing the number of tax brackets and unifying multiple property taxes. Measures were introduced in 2013 to enhance the efficiency of tax inspection and tax debt collection, including by transferring responsibility of collection of social security contributions to a single entity. The autonomy of the tax administration was also increased. For Greece, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The large gap in GDP per capita relative to the upper half of OECD countries, essentially due to lower productivity, has remained broadly unchanged in the past decade. Overall labour utilisation is comparable to the most prosperous OECD countries, as above-average hours per worker offset a low participation rate. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Central and Eastern European Countries is the average of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovenia. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD (2013), PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed Going for Growth 2015 In 2013, the authorities reduced employer social contributions for some vulnerable groups, such as young, old or unskilled workers (Job Protection Act). The 2014 Budget increased family benefits, especially by extending deductibility of the family tax allowance to employee social contributions, a step which favours low-income earners the most. Following past legislation, the legal retirement age started to increase in 2014, to reach 65 by 2022, and special regimes for early retirement are being phased out in early 2015 (except for one still remaining special regime for women). The telecommunications regulator launched a spectrum auction (2014), enabling a new mobile network operator to enter the market. However, the authorities restricted the scope of competition law as regards mergers (2013). Regulated energy prices have been cut by around a quarter in 2013-14, hampering investment and the development of liberalised markets. Operational constraints and heavier fees penalising foreign-owned retailers introduced in late 2014 are likely to distort competition in the sector. For Hungary, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-12 for Hungary. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The income gap with the upper half of OECD countries widened following the crisis, largely driven by adverse developments in labour force participation and employment, though labour utilisation remains comparatively high. Labour productivity growth has slowed down markedly with deterioration in capital deepening. There has been no progress on the policy priorities identified in the 2013 issue of The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, For this measure, EU refers to all 27 members of the European Union. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Strengthen the capacity of municipalities to manage and oversee primary education collectively or shift these responsibilities back to the central government’s education ministry. Strengthen school accountability for education outcomes. Adjust curricula to improve performance in reading and mathematics. Raise teacher quality in rural areas. Increase effective teaching time and student-teacher ratios. Reduce ownership restrictions in the electricity and fisheries sectors. Divest the National Power Company’s generation facilities to create a competitive marker in electricity generation. For Iceland, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, OECD countries has continued to narrow but remains large. It mainly stems from a productivity shortfall. Structural bottlenecks have increasingly weighed on the growth of economic activity. Modernising labour laws is crucial to encourage employment formalisation and to reduce labour market segmentation, gender bias and income inequality. Raising the quality of education and training systems would also promote the economy’s ability to respond to new market opportunities and thus job creation, thereby reducing severe poverty and income inequality. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). . For further details see Koske, I., I. Wanner, R. Bitetti and O. Barbiero (2015), The 2013 update of the OECD product market regulation indicators: Policy insights for OECD and non-OECD countries Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 Administrative and regulatory procedures and rules (e.g. to acquire land, to create and close a business) are often complex and long while outcomes are uncertain. This hinders entrepreneurship, investment and growth. Labour regulations are complex and some of them – such as employment protection legislation – are stringent, especially for large industrial firms. This reduces labour market dynamism, contributes to labour market duality and drives many workers (including women) into informality or out of jobs. A Cabinet Committee on Investment has been set up to fast track the approval process of large investment projects. The Right to Fair Compensation and transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Law passed in 2013 should reduce disputes and litigation, and thus uncertainties attached to land acquisition. However, land acquisition remains complex. Monitor the implementation of the land acquisition law and review it if it fails to shorten the land acquisition process. For large infrastructure projects, simplify the regulatory approval process by e.g. imposing clear timelines. The Reserve Bank of India approved the issuance of new banking licenses in 2014 and now allows banks to open branches without prior permission. Foreign banks can open subsidiaries and branches across the country, subject to domestic regulation. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. Due to data limitations, income levels across the distribution are derived by combining quintile income shares from nationally representative household surveys on consumption expenditures and gross national income of the household sector from the national accounts. This implies limited comparability with OECD countries’ data and generally an underestimation of inequality compared to measures based on income. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-09 for India. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: World Bank, While large, Indonesia’s GDP per capita gap relative to the upper half of the OECD is continuing to narrow, reflecting strong labour productivity growth as the economy continues to shift away from low‑productivity primary sectors to services and manufacturing. Labour utilisation is already relatively high in Indonesia but has also continued to contribute to rising GDP per capita. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per employee and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Graduation rate at upper secondary level for typical age from the general programmes and graduation rate for typical age at tertiary-type A level (first degree). Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators Going for Growth 2015 Public spending on education has fallen below the government’s target, and both outcomes and teaching quality remain poor. Programmes to improve teacher qualifications through certification and training are continuing to be expanded: guidelines for teacher performance assessment and progression came into force on 1 January 2013. The targeting of conditional cash transfers aimed at facilitating access to education will improve with the development of a national poverty database. Continue stepping-up spending in education. Encourage higher enrolment and quality at primary and secondary levels through regular teachers’ assessments and professional development. More closely link teacher salaries to qualifications and performance. A new land acquisition regime is slowly being implemented, which should smooth the way for the development of much needed transport infrastructure investment. The establishment in 2014 of an Infrastructure Prioritising Body (KP2IP) and a PPP centre within the Ministry of Finance are steps in the right direction. Taken together, the reduction in fuel subsidies in June 2013 and in November 2014 increased the price of diesel and gasoline by 67% and 89%, respectively. This will bring both prices closer to world market prices. Ease barriers to domestic and foreign investment by removing non‑strategic sectors from the negative investment list and by removing logistics bottlenecks in ports. Boost the resources of the Corruption Eradication Commission in order to enable appropriate handling of all reported cases of corruption. For Indonesia, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. Due to data limitations, income levels across the distribution are derived by combining quintile income shares from nationally representative household surveys on consumption expenditures and gross national income of the household sector from the national accounts. This implies limited comparability with OECD countries’ data and generally an underestimation of inequality compared to measures based on income. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-10 for Indonesia. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: World Bank, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Public service obligation bus routes were opened to competitive tender from December 2014. Bord Gais Energy (main supplier of pipeline gas) was privatised in mid-2014. The government has progressively been increasing the number of new Public Employment Services (Intreo) offices from 2012 to 2014. Their mandate is to encourage the return to work by providing integrated welfare and activation support as well as personalised services based on profiling. A new education and training authority (SOLAS) has been established to provide oversight and funding including for training of the unemployed. Increase tracking of labour market outcomes following jobseekers’ programme participation and adjust funding accordingly. Focus on long-term and low‑skilled unemployed. Increase employers’ involvement in training design. Allow for a smoother phasing out of benefits and supplementary payments (such as housing and medical benefits) as unemployed return to work. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 A new alternative set of personal insolvency procedures providing for negotiated debt settlement and administered by a new agency, Insolvency Service of Ireland, was brought into operation in 2013. In December 2013 the discharge period for bankruptcy was reduced from 12 to three years and a new option to file bankruptcy notices cost free was provided. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Investment in education in the Arab sectors has further shrunk the gap in class sizes of primary schools over the 2011-13 period. Heavy government regulatory procedures and involvement in business operations are hampering the functioning of product markets and private‑sector activity. A committee has been established in early 2014 to identify the regulatory obstacles for doing business. Co-ordination of local and central government interventions has been improved since end-2013 to expedite housing construction. The earned income tax credit (EITC) has been raised in 2013, but its coverage and generosity remains low. Child allowances have become more targeted, but their value has been cut significantly. Labour inspectorate resources have increased to reach a ratio of employee per labour inspectorate close to the OECD average level in 2013. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) database. This data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The lack of recovery from recession is leading Italy’s income per capita to fall further behind the leading OECD economies. The productivity performance continues to lag and labour force participation remains weak. First steps have been taken in 2014 to launch the government’s ambitious reforms in various areas, notably the labour market and social protection, the tax and judicial systems. Some of the important series of measures taken in 2012, as well as in 2013, remain to be implemented. Pursuing the rebalancing of protection from jobs to workers’ income should improve productivity by promoting a better allocation of labour to the most productive uses. Lower regulatory and ownership barriers to firm entry and exit can encourage investment, allocative efficiency and productivity growth. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Pursue rebalancing of protection from jobs to workers’ income A 2014 decree removed most constraints on the use of short term contracts for a total of up to 3 years. The 2014 enabling labour market law mandates the government to introduce a series of potentially important reforms by mid-2015. These include: i) establishing a new contract for all new hires with increasing protection through time (grandfathering the rights of existing employees); ii) circumscribing the right to reinstatement after dismissal; iii) introducing a minimum wage for sectors not covered by national bargaining; and iv) extending the coverage of the new and more integrated unemployment benefit introduced in the 2012 reform. Continue reducing labour market duality with more flexible hiring and firing and more predictable and less costly legal procedures, backed up with a more comprehensive social safety net and development of ALMPs. Use the monitoring system set up in the 2012 reforms to identify which active measures are most cost-effective, concentrating resources on these. In 2013, frequent changes to the housing tax resulted in legislative instability and uncertainty. The income tax cut introduced on a temporary basis for 2014 has been made permanent. From 2015 to 2017, new permanent contracts will benefit from a large cut in social security contributions. The 2014 enabling tax reform law provides a broad mandate to the government, including for the revision of tax expenditures and environmental taxation, to be used by end of March 2015. Legislative decrees are in the pipeline for the simplification of some aspects of the tax system, the reform of cadastral values and the revision of excise duties on tobacco. Less action has been taken in 2013-14, after quite extensive deregulation in 2011-12; a significant number of implementing decrees from that period remain to be issued. The Transport Authority and restructured energy and water authority are now in operation. Some streamlining of courts to improve efficiency through scale and specialisation economies, as well as digitisation of procedures, has been implemented in 2014. Privatisation has fallen short of announced targets. The 2014 enabling labour market law aims to improve ALMPs overall, notably with the National Employment Agency which would co-ordinate passive and active policies. Strengthen ALMPs, concentrating resources on the long-term unemployed. Identify measures that work best in the Italian context with the system of monitoring ALMP beneficiaries introduced in 2014. Make sure that the provision of ALMPs and social benefits is closely linked to their activation. For Italy, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The 2013 reform of agricultural policy, including a phasing out of quotas on the production of table rice, is being implemented. Legislation to strengthen competition in the electricity sector was approved in 2014. The introduction of National Strategic Special Zones in 2014 is promoting a range of structural reforms. The consumption tax rate was increased in 2014 and the corporate income tax rate was reduced. Narrowing the productivity gap requires reforms to reduce entry barriers and encourage inward FDI, particularly is services, where productivity has lagged behind. Measures to break down labour market duality and make the tax system more pro-growth are also needed. Enhancing the competitiveness of agriculture would facilitate Japan’s participation in trade agreements. Increasing female labour force participation is essential to mitigate demographic headwinds from a falling population. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, In the fiscal year 2014 following the removal of the surcharge on the corporate income tax. For this measure, EU refers to all 27 members of the European Union. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The June 2013 growth strategy calls for doubling the stock of inward FDI to JPY 35 trillion by 2020. In 2014, the government announced six in which regulations, including rules on construction and employment, will be relaxed to create a business-friendly environment. In 2014, the Electricity Business Act was revised to fully liberalise electricity retailing in 2016. Extend the reforms in the Special Zones nationwide. Relax entry barriers, while reducing restrictions on service imports and inward FDI, including those on ownership. Increase fines on violators of the Anti-Monopoly Act (AMA) and reduce exemptions from the AMA. Steadily implement electricity market reform, including the unbundling of generation and transmission. Follow through on the full privatisation of Japan Post Group, including its banking and insurance companies, as outlined in the revised 2012 law. Support for agricultural producers is double the OECD average, distorting trade and production and complicating Japan’s participation in comprehensive bilateral and regional trade agreements. In December 2013, legislation was approved to establish institutions supported by regional governments to promote the consolidation of farmland. The government decided to phase out the administrative allocation of table rice production targets in around five years and abolish the direct payment to rice producers by 2018. With one of the highest corporate tax rates among OECD countries, together with a narrow base, and the lowest consumption tax rate, the tax system lowers Japan’s growth potential. In April 2014, the government raised the consumption tax rate to 8%. A second tax hike planned for 2015, conditional on economic conditions, was postponed to 2017. In addition, the government announced that the corporate income tax rate would be cut to below 30% within several years, financed by measures, such as broadening the tax base. Carry out the planned increase in the consumption tax rate to 10% in 2017, while maintaining a single rate to avoid the distortions and poor targeting associated with multiple rates. Implement the announced cut in the corporate income tax rate, while broadening the tax bases for both the personal and corporate income taxes. The participation rate of women aged 25 to 54 in 2012 was the tenth lowest in the OECD. The June 2013 growth strategy targets an increase in the share of employed women among the 25 to 44-age group from 68% in 2012 to 73% in 2020. Reforms to achieve this include eliminating waiting lists for childcare centres by 2017 and subsidising firms that facilitate family-friendly working conditions, for example subsidies to establish and run childcare facilities within the firm. In addition, as from 2015, listed companies are required to disclose the number of women in executive positions. Encourage women’s labour participation through a comprehensive approach that includes increasing the availability of affordable, high-quality childcare, reducing labour supply distortions in the tax/benefit system and addressing labour market duality. Labour market duality stems from the high proportion of non-regular workers – at more than a third of total employment – and is a major driver of income inequality. In addition to having low‑paid and precarious jobs, these workers receive limited social protection coverage and less training. For Japan, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2006-10 for Japan. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Sustained rapid growth has brought GDP per capita to within a quarter of the upper half of the OECD countries. However, productivity in Korea is only about half as high, while working hours are among the longest in the OECD. Korea’s 2013 roadmap to achieve a 70% employment rate and the 2014 Three-year Plan for Economic Innovation address some key priorities, with measures to reduce regulation and increase female labour force participation. Recent free trade agreements with Canada, Australia and New Zealand have reduced barriers to foreign direct investment and imports, including in agriculture. Further regulatory reform and measures to create an attractive business climate remain essential, in part to boost the stock of inward foreign direct investment, which is the second lowest in the OECD area. Improving the efficiency of the tax system by relying more on indirect taxes would promote growth while easing budgetary pressures associated with rapidly rising social spending. Measures to break down labour market duality would boost productivity growth and encourage female employment. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, For this measure, EU refers to all 27 members of the European Union. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Legislation introduced in 2014 caps the regulatory burden by requiring that an existing regulation be abolished whenever a new one is introduced. The law also requires that the strengthening of an existing regulation must be offset by relaxing another regulation. Under the reform, five key service industries – health, education, finance, tourism and software – are under review. A global fund was launched in 2014 to encourage investment by overseas venture capitalists in Korea. However, a (backward) measure in 2013 imposed restrictions on the entry of large firms in a number of business lines that are now reserved for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Labour market duality contributes to reducing female employment and wage prospects. Increasing women’s labour force participation, currently the fifth lowest in the OECD area, will boost employment and mitigate the negative impact of rapid population ageing. From 2013, childcare and kindergarten subsidies are granted for all children aged five and below, regardless of household income. Parents are allowed to reduce working hours for up to two years following maternity leave. The government is increasing the number of high-quality part-time jobs in the public sector. The government launched a plan in 2013 to convert around a quarter of fixed-term workers in the public sector to regular employment status by 2015. Reforms in 2014 are aimed at expanding the coverage of unemployment insurance to specific categories of self-employed workers. The tax burden is low but the tax system can be made more growth-friendly, in particular given that the VAT is the second lowest in the OECD area. Such reform is also needed to cope with the double-digit growth of public social spending. In 2014, Korea signed Free Trade Agreements with Canada, Australia and New Zealand that significantly reduce barriers to agricultural imports. For Korea, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) database. This data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2006-12 for Korea. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Latvia has experienced a significant catch-up over the past ten years in terms of GDP per capita. Following a big hit during the crisis, convergence has resumed. Yet, the income gap remains substantial, at about a half compared with advanced OECD countries. Both hours worked and productivity lag significantly behind the OECD average. In addition, the share of long-term unemployment remains high. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per employee and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of the Czech Republic, Estonia, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. . Panel B: OECD, European Commission: Economic Databases and Indicators Going for Growth 2015 Reduce regulatory burdens by cutting down red tape, reviewing existing legislation and streamlining various procedures, such as getting electricity and construction permits. Reduce state ownership in the economy. Improve corporate governance of state-owned enterprises by reinstating boards of governors, requiring mandatory annual reporting and centralising oversight and management in line with arm’s length principles. Enhance the quality of transport infrastructure, focusing on roads and ports. Promote port efficiency, including by enhancing management transparency and facilitating private investment. Improve connectivity of energy networks to the rest of the EU. Continue to strengthen revenue collection, including by fighting against tax evasion. Revise the tax mix by reducing labour taxes and increasing immovable property and environmentally-related taxes. Review rules that allow micro-enterprises to pay lower social security contributions, because such rules risk reducing firms’ incentives to expand and hamper tax compliance. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Income per capita remains significantly above the level of other OECD countries but is diminishing, owing to declining labour productivity. Employment is also comparatively high. Labour force participation is weaker, although it has recently increased. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Average of net replacement rates for one-earner married couples and single with 2 children and without children, short and long‑term unemployed persons who earned 67% and 100% of average worker earnings at the time of losing job. The change in pension wealth is a measure of the incentive to remain in the workforce for an additional period. It measures the increase in the level of pension entitlement one gains by remaining in employment for an additional year. The calculation is the annual average increase in males’ pension wealth when working from age 60 to 64. Net pension wealth is the present value of the flow of pension benefits, taking account of the taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is measured and expressed as a multiple of gross annual individual earnings in the respective country. See OECD (2013), Pensions at a Glance 2013: OECD and G20 Indicators Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: Going for Growth 2015 programme for jobs, education or training for those below 25 years of age in 2014, which is managed by the public employment service (ADEM) together with other authorities. Procedures initiated by the Competition Council abolished reference prices in several professional services (i.e. architects, health and safety co-ordinators, chamber of experts) and reduced price discrimination in mobile telephony. Remove restrictions on advertising for professional services and facilitate co‑operation between professions, and scrap minimum or reference prices. Make shop opening hours more flexible. For Luxembourg, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, The tax subsidy rate is calculated as 1 minus the B-index, the latter being a measure of the before-tax income needed to break even on USD 1 of R&amp;D outlays. Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD (2013), OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2013: Innovation for Growth Going for Growth 2015 National standards for primary and secondary teacher performance have been introduced in 2013, including an evaluation system and professionalisation of the training and selection of school principals. The first round of teacher evaluations was carried out in every state in mid-2014. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 The wireless, fixed-line, satellite, media, insurance and leasing sectors have been opened more substantially to FDI in 2014. Secondary legislation to implement the 2013 reform of the energy sector has been approved, allowing for risk sharing with the private (including foreign) sector. The unified criminal procedural code was adopted in 2014. Most states have now begun to implement judicial procedural reforms that make use of oral trials. Fast-track courts for competition cases were set up in 2013 and are now in use, with nation-wide jurisdiction. Improve the accountability and professionalism of the judicial sector. Further promote the full state-level implementation of the 2008 constitutional amendments that revamped the framework for penal justice, and the extension of these to civil and commercial cases that began in 2011. New sectoral regulators were introduced in the telecoms and energy sectors in 2013 and became operational in 2014; a new competition law was also passed in 2013 that strengthens the powers of the Competition Commission. The labour reform introduced in 2012 eases the stringency of job protection for formal employment and this has the potential to reduce informality. New contracts allowing for more flexibility in wage adjustments came into use during 2013, also reducing judicial uncertainty. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2004-12 for Mexico. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Since 2009, the advantage in GDP per capita against the upper half of OECD countries has been reduced, mainly due to a declining trend in hourly productivity. Ensuring swifter reduction in mortgage interest deductibility and better targeting social housing to low‑income earners would stimulate the rental market while at the same time reducing income inequality. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD estimates based on the European Labour Force Survey (unpublished data). Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The tax credit for low and middle-income earners was increased in 2013 and 2014 and will be further raised by 2017. Also, the withdrawal of the credit will start at an annual income level of around EUR 40 000 and will be abolished at about EUR 110 000. Increase reduced value-added tax rates and phase out the tax credit at lower income levels to finance lower labour taxes for low-income earners. Phase out more rapidly the transferability of the individual tax credit. Make childcare support more dependent on second earners’ income rather than family income. From July 2015, dismissal procedures of regular contracts will be somewhat simplified. The severance pay will be linked to seniority rather than age and reduced to EUR 75 000 or an annual salary, whichever is higher, but workers over 50 will benefit from a more generous scheme until 2020. Further simplify the dismissal system by ensuring swift decision‑making and reduce uncertainty by capping additional compensation costs in the case of employer’s unlawful behaviour. Make the cap on severance payments decreasing as workers approach retirement to prevent severance payment from being used as an early retirement route. From 2015, a new reform will be introduced with tighter eligibility criteria for disability benefits for young disabled persons. Since 2013, new mortgages are eligible to interest tax deductibility only if they are regularly amortised. The tax treatment of mortgage interest has been made less generous for new and existing mortgages with a very gradual reduction over a 30-years horizon. Since July 2013, a gradual differentiation of rents by income has been initiated to encourage higher-income households to leave social housing. The maximum duration of unemployment benefits will be decreased from 36 to 24 months between 2016 and 2019, although social partners can agree on an additional insurance. From July 2015, the period after which all job offers will have to be accepted will be shortened from twelve to six months, in association with a broader definition of For the Netherlands, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-12 for the Netherlands. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, OECD = 100. The variance components in mathematics, sciences and reading were estimated for all students in participating countries with data on socio-economic background and study programmes. The variance in student performance is calculated as the square of the standard deviation of PISA scores in reading, mathematics and science for the sample of students used in the analysis. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed Going for Growth 2015 The government commissioned a report from the Productivity Commission, which was published in July 2014, on how to improve new regulatory regimes and make system-wide improvements to existing regulation. The Single Trade Window, which enables parties involved in international trade to submit clearance data required by border agencies electronically, became operational in 2014. Implement the Productivity Commission’s regulatory recommendations. Ease FDI screening requirements, clarify criteria for meeting the net national benefit test and remove ministerial discretion in their application. Increase the time that advance rulings on imports remain valid, and publish rulings of general interest. The government sold large stakes in two major electricity generators and Air New Zealand in 2013 but remains the majority shareholder in each of these companies. Sell remaining government shareholdings in electricity generators and Air New Zealand, and privatise New Zealand Post. In rail, liberalise entry, separate infrastructure ownership and service delivery and privatise KiwiRail. Remove legal exemptions from competition policy in international freight transport. Use tolls and congestion pricing to manage demand in road, energy and water sectors. The government introduced charter schools, which are obliged to serve underprivileged children, on a trial basis in 2014. An education reform aiming to improve teaching by strengthening collaboration between principals, teachers and schools was agreed in 2014 and will be effective in 2015. Boost funding for business R&amp;D, by e.g. reinstating the R&amp;D tax credit. Evaluate grant programmes. Co-ordinate immigration and education policies with business skill needs for innovation. The government established the Integrated Performance and Incentive Framework in 2014 to set quality and performance improvement targets for primary health organisations and financially reward good performance. Increase District Health Boards’ incentives to enhance hospital efficiency, improve workforce utilisation, integrate primary and secondary care, and better manage chronic care. Continue to encourage the adoption of more healthy lifestyles. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2008-11 for New Zealand. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, GDP per capita remains high relative to leading OECD countries (in terms of both total and mainland GDP). Growth in GDP per capita has declined, however, with a weaker contribution of both labour productivity and labour utilisation over the past five years. Multifactor productivity is the single most important factor explaining this decline. The government has taken some actions in the areas identified as priorities in the 2013 issue of The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). GDP per capita (Mainland) excludes petroleum production and shipping. While total GDP overestimates the sustainable income potential, mainland GDP slightly underestimates it since returns on the financial assets the petroleum fund holds abroad are not included. Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD estimates based on the European Labour Force Survey (unpublished data). Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 In 2013, the authorities introduced a new trial using the work assessment allowance as a wage supplement, to make it easier to combine disability benefits and work. Evaluate the effectiveness of the work assessment allowance trial and the July 2011 reform of sick leave. Tighten access to sickness and disability schemes with stronger enforcement of back-to-work plans and independent checks of general practitioners’ assessments. If such action does not lower take-up, reduce the replacement rate for long-term sickness absence and shift more costs to employers. In 2014, the government sold Cermaq, one of the world’s largest fish farming companies. The ownership share of Entra, a large real estate company, has been reduced from 100% to around 50%. The government tripled investment in teacher training in 2014. The tax-assessed values of second homes and commercial properties in the wealth tax have been increased. This implies a small reduction of the favourable tax treatment of real estate. The wealth tax rate has been slightly reduced. For Norway, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2004-11 for Norway. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, GDP per capita has been converging steadily towards leading OECD countries due to strong labour productivity growth. However, the shortfall relative to the best performing countries remains substantial, notably because of the low employment rate of women and older workers. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, The change in pension wealth is a measure of the incentive to remain in the workforce for an additional period. It measures the increase in the level of pension entitlement one gains by remaining in employment for an additional year. The calculation is the annual average increase in males’ pension wealth when working from age 55 to 60. Net pension wealth is the present value of the flow of pension benefits, taking account of the taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is measured and expressed as a multiple of gross annual individual earnings in the respective country. See OECD (2013), Pensions at a Glance 2013: OECD and G20 Indicators Panel A: Ageing and Employment Policies – Statistics on average effective age of retirement . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 In 2013-14, the government scaled back regulations of professional services in 142 professions and another wave of deregulation has started, covering more than 100 professions. Some entry procedures were eased in early 2014. The government plans to reform bankruptcy procedures for consumers and firms, and the parliament adopted a draft bill for consumers in June 2014. The 2012-13 privatisation plan has been finalised, raising revenues of 0.3% of GDP in 2013. Increase women’s retirement age at a more rapid pace than scheduled. Phase out all special occupational pension regimes, eliminate remaining pre-retirement schemes, and prevent disability pensions from becoming more attractive than old-age pensions. Remove the prohibition to lay off workers less than four years before retirement. Reduce the tax wedge on labour income, especially for low wages, by shifting the tax burden to environmental and immovable property taxes. Make all labour contracts subject to the same tax and social contribution regime. The insufficient number of places in pre-school education holds back women’s employment. Public higher-education institutions (HEIs) have little financial autonomy, their programmes are not well adapted to job-market needs, and access to student loans is restricted. The government has been expanding mandatory pre-school education, but facilities remain insufficient. Parents’ costs of accessing pre-school education were capped at PLN 1 per hour in June 2013. A new curriculum for vocational education was developed with employers and introduced in 2013; it requires that at least 50% of students’ time be spent on practical training. A draft law foresees the obligation for HEIs to specialise in either academic or vocational education and to include 3-month internships in vocational programmes. Value-added tax refunds on building materials were abolished in 2014. ad valorem For Poland, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Graduation rate for typical age at upper-secondary level (first-time graduate). 2011 data for Portugal. Due to a statistical feature generated by the programme in Portugal, for this country data refer to graduation rates for students under 25 years old. Panel A: OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 New ALMP measures include short training courses, financial support for internships, a hiring subsidy paid to companies that provide training and lower social security contributions for hiring unemployed individuals below 30 or above 45 years (2013). Job protection for permanent workers was lowered by further (i.e. on top of what was already achieved in 2011-12) reducing severance pay in case of dismissals (2013). In 2013, the Authorities temporarily imposed conditions that resulted in substantive declines of administrative extensions, but a relaxation of these conditions decided in 2014 is likely to revive extensions for a large majority of sectoral agreements. A new regulatory framework law was passed in 2013. Several privatisations were carried out in network sectors and some steps were taken to curb excessive electricity generation support. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 The Authorities have implemented the Zero Authorisation initiative for many services and industrial projects, and eliminated licensing surcharges levied by municipalities. A silence-is-consent rule has also been put in place for many licensing issues. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Going for Growth 2015 Regulatory impact assessment (RIA) has been extended at an early stage of new regulation, i.e. when a draft law is proposed. Two thousands and five hundred businessmen were amnestied as of March 2014. A May 2013 federal law granted business ombudsman the status of public body. The ambitious privatisation plans for 2014-16 were substantially scaled down in June 2013. Since October 2013, Russian legislation on foreign investment is conforming to the OECD standards. International agreements not based on the principle of reciprocity are facilitated. The law on the reorganisation of the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), signed in April 2014, should increase efficiency through integration with other specialised academies and by reducing non-research tasks. A Russian scientific fund that aims to support leading research teams was created in November 2013. Direct support to innovation – and to investment in infrastructure – by SMEs will increase over the 2014-16 period. The second phase of the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention was implemented in October 2013. Since January 2013, civil servants are required to rotate every 3-5 years. Since September 2013, senior officials and their family are not allowed to hold financial assets in foreign banks. Since April 2013, public institutions and SOEs are required to treat cases of violation of the Code of Ethics and conflict of interest in a commission. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 In order to raise health outcomes, it was recommended to encourage healthy lifestyles and to further increase public funding while ensuring cost‑efficiency. Since June 2013, smoking is prohibited in public places. The Ministry of Health is detached to a separate body since June 2014. Since 2014 payment of outpatient care has been made more efficient by taking into account not only the volume of services (e.g. the number of visits) but also other characteristics (e.g. the number of patients, their age and sex, morbidity rates and the type of assistance provided). Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. Due to data limitations, income levels across the distribution are derived by combining quintile income shares from nationally representative household surveys and gross national income of the household sector from the national accounts. This implies limited comparability with OECD countries’ data. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-08 for the Russian Federation. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: World Bank, The rapid catch-up relative to the upper half of OECD countries has continued thanks to strong labour productivity. However, labour utilisation is still lagging behind and potential employment growth stalled. Some progress has been achieved in the area of education, by increasing teachers’ salaries and the quality of pre-primary education as well as in product market regulation, by reducing some barriers to entrepreneurship. More needs to be done to scale up and increase the efficiency of public employment services, activation and training programmes. Strengthening jobseekers’ activation, especially on training and job-search support, removing obstacles to labour mobility and encouraging female labour force participation would increase overall labour utilisation. Reducing barriers to competition, especially in non-manufacturing industries, and strengthening innovation and education outcomes would increase productivity. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD (2013), PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed Going for Growth 2015 Pilot projects of secondary vocational education including workplace training (dual education) were launched in 2013. A new Act on Vocational Education and Training is planned for December 2014.Teachers’ wages have been increased but remain among the lowest of OECD countries. Several kindergartens have been involved in European funded projects aimed at promoting the inclusion of Roma children in pre-school education. The 2015 Budget approved the allocation of EUR 5 million funding for extending or reconstructing pre-school education facilities. Reforms initiated in May 2013 have streamlined active labour market programmes and set preconditions to increase the client-orientation of public employment services (PES). The launch of a web portal and development of a back office IT system have contributed to improving PES capacities. The quality of educational services for children aged from 3 to 6 years increased but access to childcare for children below 3 years old remains one of the lowest among EU countries. procedure and the creation of single contact points in 2013 to handle notifications and licenses via the Internet have simplified the process of opening and operating a business. The Smart Specialization Strategy, adopted in November 2013, should promote co-operation between business and academia. The JEREMIE initiative (aimed at providing funding to innovative SMEs) has continued for the 2014-20 programming period. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, the upper half of OECD countries has widened since 2008, reflecting a decline in labour utilisation and slowdown in labour productivity growth. Reform momentum has picked-up in the past two years, notably with the employment protection reform, which has been contributing to reduce labour market duality. The Parliament approved a list of 15 state-owned enterprises to be privatised and a new Slovenia Sovereign Holding to manage state assets has been established, but progress in reducing state involvement in the economy has been slow. A pension reform increased the statutory age for retirement, but further reform is needed. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, The change in pension wealth is a measure of the incentive to remain in the workforce for an additional period. It measures the increase in the level of pension entitlement one gains by remaining in employment for an additional year. The calculation is the annual average increase in males’ pension wealth when working from age 60 to 64. Net pension wealth is the present value of the flow of pension benefits, taking account of the taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is measured and expressed as a multiple of gross annual individual earnings in the respective country. See OECD (2013), Pensions at a Glance 2013: OECD and G20 Indicators Panel A: . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Effective retirement ages are expected to increase by around two and a half years to 62 for women and by nearly a year to 63 for men by 2020, following the 2013 pension reform. With the same reform, pensions’ indexation has been cut from 100% of gross wage growth to 60% of gross wage growth and 40% of inflation. A Slovenia Sovereign Holding (SSH) became operational in 2014 to centralise the management of state-owned assets and facilitate privatisation, but the government and the Parliament have yet to agree on an asset management strategy. The Parliament approved a list of 15 state-owned enterprises to be privatised, including one state-owned bank and a major telecom provider. Four companies have been sold already while seven are in the privatisation process. Going for Growth 2015 Going for Growth 2013 Student work, which benefits from a preferential tax and regulatory treatment, has been made somewhat less attractive to employers and students with the 2013 labour market reform. This can indirectly incentivise students toward earlier completion of studies. A new Employment Relations Act that entered into force in April 2013 was a bold step in fostering convergence of termination costs across contracts, thereby gradually reducing duality. As a result, Slovenian legislation on this dimension is now just slightly more rigid than the average OECD country. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Progress has been made in strengthening active labour market policies to tackle youth unemployment with the introduction of a wage subsidy for young workers in early 2014. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per employee and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 A report on state-owned enterprises was produced by the Presidential Review Committee and accepted by the Cabinet in April 2013. An inter-ministerial committee is planned to guide implementation of the recommendations in the review. In 2013, guidelines for reducing municipal red tape were published. In 2014, a Ministry for Small Business Development has been established. The National Education Collaboration Trust was launched in 2013 to work with civil society to improve the professionalisation of teaching and to increase classroom resources. Improve teacher training, enhance accountability and monitoring of school leadership. Teach English as a second language earlier, while maintaining mother‑tongue instruction for longer. Upgrade infrastructure. Gradually phase out school fees in the public school system. Expand vocational education and training. In April 2013, the government and social partners signed the Youth Employment Accord, setting out joint commitments to prioritise youth employment and skills development. At the same time, the President signed the Employment Services Act, bolstering public employment services including provisions for young job-seekers. In addition, the Youth Enterprise Development Strategy was established to increase youth entrepreneurship. In early 2014, a youth wage subsidy was introduced, which should stimulate demand for younger workers. For South Africa, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) database. This data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. Due to data limitations, income levels across the distribution are derived by combining quintile income shares from nationally representative household surveys and gross national income of the household sector from the national accounts. This implies limited comparability with OECD countries’ data. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2006-11 for the South Africa. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: World Bank, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 School drop-out rates are high. Higher education programmes are ill-adapted to job market needs, reducing workers’ employability and productivity. A major educational reform has been introduced and will enter into force gradually in 2014-15 and 2016-17 academic years. Measures include establishing external standard evaluations and basic vocational tracks, and allowing for an earlier choice of educational curriculum. University tuition fees have been raised and eligibility for grants now takes into account academic achievement. The number of beneficiaries has increased but the average grant amount has decreased. Make school-based vocational education more practice-oriented and raise employers’ involvement in training design. Increase specialisation in universities. Do not reduce the average amount of grants until other financing alternatives, such as loans with income-contingent repayments, are available. Provide more training opportunities for adults and focus on encouraging participation by the low-skilled and older people. A new activation strategy has been set-up in 2013 and 2014, linking the allocation of funding from central government to regional results, encouraging the systematic use of profiling by regionally-run agencies, creating a single nationwide portal for job-search, and foreseeing the involvement of private providers in delivering job-search assistance. Evaluate the effects of the 2012 wage bargaining reform. Based on the findings from this evaluation, as a first option gradually increase representation requirements for both unions and firms for new sectorial collective agreements with a view to making the bargaining process more inclusive. As a second option, require firms to opt-in rather than allowing firms to opt-out from new sectorial agreements. For Spain, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The government is taking initiatives to improve the performance of the education system. Macro‑prudential policies are being introduced to limit household debt-related risk. In contrast little has been done to improve the supply-side of the housing market and to ease job protection. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Increases in risk weights for mortgages and the introduction of a countercyclical capital buffer (2014) have reduced macroeconomic risks. Planning regulations and rent controls were eased marginally in 2013. For Sweden, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2004-11 for Sweden. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Since 2008, real GDP per capita and productivity have been growing at a pace similar to the upper half of OECD countries. Income per capita remains above the average of advanced economies but productivity is lagging. Progress has been made in agricultural reform with direct payments being shifted towards biodiversity and sustainable resource utilisation, as part of the 2014-17 policy framework. In education, an inter-cantonal agreement has been reached regarding harmonisation of scholarships and loans, and limited tax deductibility of training fees for professionals has been adopted. Eliminating price support in agriculture and taxing polluting inputs and outputs would accelerate the transition to a sustainable agriculture. Increasing public spending on childcare and encouraging access for children from disadvantaged backgrounds could raise women’s labour force participation and reduce inequality. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Graduation rate for typical age at tertiary type-A level (first-time graduate). Tertiary type-A graduation rates in Switzerland are low by OECD standards, in part explained by the predominance of vocational streams with over 60% of students taking this track on upper‑secondary level. OECD = 100. The variance components in mathematics, sciences and reading were estimated for all students in participating countries with data on socio-economic background and study programmes. The variance in student performance is calculated as the square of the standard deviation of PISA scores in reading, mathematics and science for the sample of students used in the analysis. For this measure, EU refers to all 27 members of the European Union. Panel A: OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators ; OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 The inter-cantonal agreement aiming at harmonising scholarships and loans entered into force in March 2013 with 16 out of the 26 cantons having ratified it. Training and advanced-training fees are now tax deductible up to CHF 12 000 for professionals. Step up public funding of pre-schools and enrolment therein, and increase immigrant participation by introducing targeted pre-school cash support. Consider teacher-training programmes focusing on helping teachers develop practical remedial skills. Improve access to tertiary education for students from lower socio‑economic and immigrant backgrounds through special financial support (e.g. means-tested grants). In March 2013, the Parliament approved a new policy regime for 2014-17 whereby direct payments (CHF 2¾ billion) will be shifted toward broader public-interest objectives, mainly supply security and the environment. Eliminate all forms of farm price support, and condition all direct payments to environmental outcomes. Consider introducing a tax on inputs (fertilisers) or outputs (methane from livestock) generating pollution, and end farmers’ exemption from the mineral oil tax. Remove impediments to shifting agricultural land to other uses. Further lower the border protection of domestic production. Remove impediments to structural change in land law, especially inheritance rules favouring the passing on of farms between generations. In 2014 Switzerland agreed to sign up to a new global standard on automatic information exchange on bank accounts. A reform on corporate taxation was proposed in 2013 by the Swiss Federal Council to introduce internationally accepted measures to replace the current cantonal and federal tax regimes. The paucity and high cost of childcare, dissuasive effective marginal tax rates on second earners, weak corporate culture of gender diversity and a still positive wage gap contribute to women’s high incidence of part-time work. practice or by setting quotas. Move from joint to individual tax assessment of spouses’ income. For Switzerland, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, the upper half of OECD countries continues to narrow but remains large. The convergence achieved over the past decade has been driven by productivity gains, and more recently by strong job creation outside agriculture. was published by the Government in May 2014. However, this initiative faces political obstacles and its success hinges on the adoption of supporting legislation. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD (2014), PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 Time-limited reductions in social security contributions were granted in selected provinces in 2013. was published in May 2014. It aims at replacing rigid employment protection with a severance saving accounts available for all workers – as foreseen in the new The privatisation of all 21 electricity distribution companies was completed in 2013. Three power plants were also privatised in 2014. The pensionable age is 47, which creates disincentives to continued formal sector work at older ages, as the phasing in of the pension reform is only very gradual. No action taken since the Strategy to Combat the Informal Economy, 2012‑13. For Turkey, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2004-11 for Turkey. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The GDP per capita gap relative to best performing OECD countries, which started to widen in the early 2000s, shows signs of stabilising, or even narrowing. Productivity remains below its pre-crisis level. The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, OECD = 100. The variance components in mathematics, sciences and reading were estimated for all students in participating countries with data on socio-economic background and study programmes. The variance in student performance is calculated as the square of the standard deviation of PISA scores in reading, mathematics and science for the sample of students used in the analysis. Upper half of OECD countries in terms of PISA scores in mathematics, science and reading and in terms of the total variance as a percentage of the OECD variance. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD (2013), PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science Going for Growth 2015 Compulsory participation in education or training was extended to age 18 (2013/14). The Pupil Premium to help with the education of pupils from disadvantaged background was further increased over the period 2013-14. Apprenticeship funding through the Apprentice Grants for Employers was further increased in Budget 2014. Monitor the impact of previous reforms such as the Education Act 2011 on the average quality of education outcomes and equity across social groups. Encourage the expansion of high quality postsecondary vocational programmes. As a result of earlier reforms, the share of population receiving disability benefits and the number of weeks lost due to sickness leave have fallen. Universal Credit, a welfare reform aimed at increasing work incentives, is being introduced gradually since 2013. A Better Care Fund, providing funding to local governments to join up health and care services was announced in June 2013. Expenditure-based fiscal consolidation with cuts in public sector employment has continued hence contributing to greater efficiency in the delivery of public services, but health and education have been spared from adjustments. The Nationally Significant Infrastructure Planning regime was extended to business and commercial projects in the Growth and Infrastructure Act 2013. Closely monitor the effectiveness of the new National Planning Policy Framework, introduced in 2012, in accelerating the planning permissions process and approval rate and take further steps if needed. Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, The employment rate is defined with respect to the economically active population; a positive growth rate corresponds to a decline in the structural unemployment rate and vice versa. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Panel A: OECD, Economic Outlook 96 Database . Panel B: OECD, Panel A: OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators . Panel B: OECD, Going for Growth 2015 In 2013, the third round of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College and Career Training grants programme supported partnerships between community colleges and businesses to (re)train the unemployed as well as underemployed workers. In 2014, support was provided to partnerships that support public-private efforts to put the long-term unemployed back to work. The 4th round of the Disability Employment Initiative launched in 2013 seeks to improve education, training and employment opportunities. The continued roll out of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 in 2013 and 2014 included a number of programmes that act to improve quality and reduce costs in government health care provision as well as to facilitate greater risk pooling in the individual and small-group market. Cut the statutory marginal corporate income tax rate and broaden its base to reduce the incentive to shift business activity to non-corporate forms. Act towards rapid international agreement and take measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting. Eliminate regressive exemptions such as mortgage interest deductions for owner‑occupied housing. Simplify eligibility procedures for numerous (and often changing) tax provisions. Reduce record keeping requirements when the tax authorities already possess the underlying information from other sources with a view to lower the cost of tax compliance and raise the efficiency of taxation. Increase reliance on consumption and environmental taxation. The Bipartisan Student Loan Certainty Act of 2013 bases interest rates for new Federal Direct Student Loans on long-term treasury bonds. The Preschool for All initiative aims to increase access to preschool education for 4-year olds. The Agriculture Act of 2014 introduced a number of reforms, notably eliminating a number of fixed annual payments based on historical production and modifying the cotton support regime to reduce production and trade distortions. However, the reforms also introduced new crop insurance options, which act like production-related subsidies. For the United States, all priority areas from the 2013 issue of Household income across the distribution is measured by income standards with varying emphasis on different points of the distribution – from the low to the top-end of the distribution. See methodological notes at the end of the chapter for the computation of household income across the distribution. Data refer to 2005-12 for the United States. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: OECD, Methodological details on the calculation of household incomes across the distribution for all α ≠ 0 and for all α = 0, x = (x 1,…   &gt; 0 These measures of income levels place varying sensitivity to different parts of the income distribution, as governed by the parameter α, with greater weight on higher incomes and less weight on lower incomes as α rises. Hence, α can be interpreted as (an inverse) measure of the level of inequality aversion. The parameter value α  = 1 income standards (with α  &lt; 1 income standards (with α  &gt; 1 Weak emphasis on the bottom of the distribution: the geometric mean (α  = 0 Moderate emphasis on the bottom of the distribution: this intermediate case (α  = -3 Strong emphasis on the bottom of the distribution: this case (α  = -8 , income of the poor) is empirically generally close to the mean income of the poor, where the latter are defined in relative terms with a threshold set between 50 and 60% of median income. Moderate emphasis on the top of the distribution: this intermediate case (α  = 4 Strong emphasis on the top of the distribution: this case (α  = 10 Additional details on the methodology can be found in Causa, O., A. de Serres and N. Ruiz (2014), Missing countries do not have a national statutory minimum wage except for Mexico. Data refer to 2004-05 and 2009-10 for India and to 2009 (instead of 2008) for Chile. Exactly half of all workers have wages either below or above the median wage for the OECD countries. Percentage of minimum to average wage for China, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and India. The cost of labour is the sum of the wage level and the corresponding social security contribution paid by employers. 2009 (instead of 2008) data for Chile. Panel A: OECD, ; China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, National Bureau of Statistics; Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística ( Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios , Vol. 152, No. 3-4. Panel B: OECD, Simple average of the net replacement rates for the following households situations: single with no child and with two children at 67% and 100% AW, one-earner married couple with no child and with two children at 67% AW and 100% AW. After tax and including unemployment and family benefits. Social assistance and other means-tested benefits are assumed to be available subject to relevant income conditions. Housing costs are assumed equal to 20% of AW. The OECD average excludes Chile for 2007 and Mexico for 2007 and 2012. For Turkey, the average worker earnings (AW) value is not available. Calculations are based on average production worker earnings (APW). For Israel, data refer to 2008 instead of 2007. Initial phase of unemployment but following any waiting period. Any income taxes payable on unemployment benefits are determined in relation to annualised benefit values (i.e. monthly values multiplied by 12) even if the maximum benefit duration is shorter than 12 months. After tax and including unemployment benefits, social assistance, family and housing benefits in the 60th month of benefit receipt. Values for Italy and Turkey are equal to zero in 2007 and 2012. Measured as the difference between total labour compensation paid by the employer and the net take-home pay of employees, as a ratio of total labour compensation. It therefore includes both employer and employee social security contributions. For India, the data cover manufacturing companies with 20 or more employees (which represent 5% of all companies in the sector); liability to health insurance and Employee Provident Fund contributions in India are restricted to employees in firms that have 20 or more employees. In China, a significant portion of workers are not covered by the social security system; hence their tax wedge is significantly lower than the figure reported here, which reflects the situation of workers covered. For Latvia, the last available year is 2012. . For BIICS countries, data represent the latest figures based on the methodology described in: Gandullia, L., N. Iacobone and A. Thomas (2012), , No. 14, OECD Publishing, Paris, Measured as the difference between the change in total labour compensation paid by employers and the change in the net take-home pay of employees, as a result of an extra unit of national currency of labour income. The difference is expressed as a percentage of the change in total labour compensation. For India, the data cover manufacturing companies with 20 or more employees (which represent 5% of all companies in the sector); liability to health insurance and Employee Provident Fund contributions in India are restricted to employees in firms that have 20 or more employees. In China, a significant portion of workers are not covered by the social security system; hence their tax wedge is significantly lower than the figure reported here, which reflects the situation of workers covered. Modelling the Tax Burden on Labour Income in Brazil, China, India, Indonesia and South Africa , No. 14, OECD Publishing, Paris, The change in pension wealth is a measure of the incentive to remain in the workforce for an additional period. It measures the increase in the level of pension entitlement one gains by remaining in employment for an additional year. The calculation is the annual average increase in males’ pension wealth when working from age 55 to 59 (early retirement) and from age 60 to 64 (old-age pension). Net pension wealth is the present value of the flow of pension benefits, taking account of the taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is measured and expressed as a multiple of gross annual individual earnings in the respective country. See OECD (2013), Pensions at a Glance 2013: OECD and G20 Indicators between single and dual-earner couple families, for a given overall level of earnings – e.g. looking at couple families with incomes of 133% of average earnings. It shows the difference in net transfers to government between two household cases: (1)  – with one earner with 133% of average earnings and (2)  – both spouses earn the same either average earnings or 67% of average earnings. The difference is in percentage points and computed as [(1)-(2)]/(1). For Latvia, the last available year is 2010. Childcare expenditure covers children under three enrolled in childcare and children between the ages of three and five enrolled in pre-school. Childcare refers to formal day-care services, such as day-care centres and family day-care. Pre-school includes kindergartens and day-care centres which usually provide an educational content as well as traditional care for children (ISCED 0 under UNESCO’s classification system). Local government spending may not be properly captured in the data for federal countries. Net transfers and childcare fees for households with two children aged 2 and 3, 2012 Second earner taking up employment at 67% of average wage and the first earner earns 100% of average wage. Lone parent taking up employment at 67% of average wage. Couples where the first earner earns 100% of the average wage and the second earns 67% of the average wage. Lone parent earning 67% of the average wage. For Canada, the European Union, Finland, Norway, OECD, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia and the United Kingdom, childcare benefits refer to childcare and other benefits. Single parent with two children earning 67% of the average wage. Average tax wedge faced by the second earner when earning 67% of the average wage in a family with two children, where the first earner receives a full average wage. The last available year is 2012 for Canada. The OECD average excludes Australia, Chile, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico and New Zealand. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive The last available data refer to 2012 for BRIICS countries. In Panel C, values for 2013 are equal to zero for Chile, Indonesia and New Zealand. The last available year is 2011 for Australia, Ireland, Israel, Luxembourg, Poland and Spain; 2009 for the United Kingdom. OECD and EU averages exclude Greece, Iceland and Turkey. For 2007, data refer to 2008 for Chile. The last available year is 2011 for Canada, the Czech Republic, Latvia, the Slovak Republic, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States; 2010 for Austria, Belgium, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain and Switzerland; 2009 for Estonia, Finland, Hungary and Slovenia; 2008 for France, Greece, Iceland, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Norway, Portugal, Brazil, Indonesia and South Africa; 2007 for Australia, Chile, Denmark and New Zealand; 2006 for Israel and Turkey. For 2006, data refer to 2007 for Portugal; 2005 for Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland and South Africa; 2004 for Denmark and Finland; 2003 for France, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Brazil and Indonesia; 2002 for Austria, Belgium, Iceland and Mexico; 2001 for Australia and Turkey; 2000 for Israel. The last available year is 2013 for Australia, Canada, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States; 2012 for Chile, Norway, Switzerland and Turkey; 2011 for Austria, Belgium, Finland, Germany, Greece, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia; 2010 for Denmark, Estonia, France, Poland, Portugal and Spain; 2009 for the Czech Republic; 2008 for Brazil, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Luxembourg, the Russian Federation and South Africa; 2007 for Indonesia and Israel. For 2006, data refer to 2008 for Slovenia; 2007 for the Russian Federation; 2005 for Indonesia and Latvia and 2000 for Israel. ICTWSS: Database on Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State Intervention and Social Pacts in 34 Countries between 1960 and 2012 (Version 4, April 2013), Amsterdam Institute for Advanced Labour Studies. The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries Percentage of population aged 25-34 and 45-54, 2012 Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators programme in Portugal, for this country 2011 data refer to graduation rates for students under 25 years old. The last available year is 2013 for China, 2011 for Canada and 2010 for Switzerland; for the BRIICS, data refer to graduation rate at upper secondary level for typical age from the general programmes except for India for which upper secondary education is defined as persons aged 19 year olds who completed upper secondary education. In Panel A, OECD and EU averages exclude Australia, Belgium, Estonia and France for 2007 and 2012 and Austria, Germany and the Netherlands for 2007 only. In Panel B, OECD and EU averages exclude Belgium, Estonia, France and Korea for 2007 and 2012 and Luxembourg, Chile for 2007 only. First-time graduation rates for typical age at the tertiary-type A level. Data refer to 2013 for China (instead of 2012). For Turkey, data refer to 2006 instead of 2007. The last available year is 2011 for Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom; 2007 for Greece; for the BRIICS, data refer to graduation rate for typical age from tertiary-type A programmes (first degree) except for India for which tertiary education refer to the 24 year olds and over who have graduated. Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators ; CEIC for China data; and India National Sample Survey (64th and 68th Rounds). PISA is the Programme for International Student Assessment. Data for India is the average for 2010 of the states of Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh and therefore may not be representative of nation-wide outcomes. PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science PISA is the Programme for International Student Assessment. OECD = 100. Average of PISA scores in mathematics and science only in 2009 for France. The variance components in mathematics, sciences and reading were estimated for all students in participating countries with data on socio-economic background and study programmes. The variance in student performance is calculated as the square of the standard deviation of PISA scores in reading, mathematics and science for the sample of students used in the analysis. PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed Education at a Glance 2011 PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed The last available year is 2012 for Australia, Brazil, Colombia, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands and Poland. 2013 data for Chile, China, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Korea and Norway; 2011 for Australia, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Portugal. Data refer to 2012 for Brazil, China, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and South Africa. EU refers to all 27 members of the European Union. Average 2008-10 for Chile; average 2008-12 for the Russian Federation and Colombia. Average 2006-08 for Turkey. 2009 for Colombia. The OECD average excludes Iceland and New Zealand. 2001 for South Africa; 2004 for Canada and Luxembourg; 2005 for Italy and 2010 for Ireland. Average of years 2011 and 2012 for Greece; average of years 2010 and 2011 for Australia, Belgium, France, Israel, Italy, Mexico, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and South Africa; 2012 for Switzerland; 2011 for Austria, Iceland, New Zealand and Sweden; 2009 for Luxembourg. Average of years 2006 and 2007 for Austria; average of years 2005 and 2007 for Denmark, Greece, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Sweden; 2007 for Chile; 2004 for Switzerland. The last available year is 2011 for Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand, Poland, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden and the United States; 2009 for China and Luxembourg. Instead of 2006, data refer to 2007 for Belgium, Denmark, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Slovenia and Sweden; 2008 for Chile, New Zealand, Poland, Switzerland, Turkey; 2010 for the Slovak Republic. Panel A: OECD, . Panel B: 