 was launched in 2005 as a new form of structural surveillance complementing the OECD’s long­standing country and sector­specific surveys. In line with the OECD’s 1960 founding Convention, the aim is to help promote vigorous sustainable economic growth and improve the well­being of OECD citizens. This surveillance is based on a systematic and in­depth analysis of structural policies and their outcomes across OECD members, relying on a set of internationally comparable and regularly updated policy indicators with a well­established link to performance. Using these indicators, alongside the expertise of OECD committees and staff, policy priorities and recommendations are derived for each member and, since the 2011 issue, six key non­member economies with which the OECD works closely (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and South Africa). From one issue to the next, In gauging performance, the focus is on GDP per capita, productivity and employment. As highlighted in the past and again in this issue, this leaves out some important dimensions of well­being. For this reason, regularly features thematic chapters dedicated to these other dimensions, and increasingly looks at the side effects of growth­enhancing priorities on other government policy objectives. The widespread deceleration in productivity since the crisis could presage the beginning of a new low-growth era. The global economy’s momentum remains sluggish, heightening concerns that there has been a structural downshift in growth rates compared with pre-crisis levels. These concerns, already prevalent among advanced OECD countries for some time, now encompass emerging-market economies and are fuelled also by high unemployment and falling labour force participation in many countries. Some of the factors behind the productivity slowdown have yet to be fully understood, not least the role and nature of technological progress. But one worrying development is the marked slowdown in global trade activity relative to world production. Aside from its fundamental role as a vector of technology and knowledge diffusion, international trade boosts productivity through stronger competition pressures on domestic markets. And trade-related concerns are magnified by subdued investment in new plant, machinery and equipment as well as in less tangible assets such as research and development or new business processes and workforce training, which are needed to make the most of new technologies. Indeed, current business investment rates in most advanced economies are below what would be needed to sustain higher trend growth rates. In several emerging-market economies – notably Brazil, India and Indonesia – infrastructure investment is not sufficient to support high rates of industrialisation and urbanisation, hampering potential growth. Weak global demand, pressures from budgetary consolidation and remaining dysfunctions in financial markets are exerting a drag on trade, investment and job creation, notably among smaller firms whose access to external sources of funding is often critical. The current pace of activity thus reflects a combination of both cyclical weaknesses and structural deficiencies in policy settings, although the relative contribution of these factors is difficult to assess. Clearly, addressing financial market failures and restoring healthy banking-sector balance sheets – particularly in the euro area – remain top priorities. This would do much to boost the impact of structural reforms in other complementary areas, which are also needed. For instance, firms’ incentives to invest in new markets and technologies as well as to seek more efficient ways to allocate capital and labour resources could be enhanced by further reductions in regulatory barriers to competition along with greater openness to foreign trade and investment. Such reforms could also help foster job creation if accompanied by measures to facilitate wage adjustments and reduce labour costs, including further shifts in taxation from labour towards consumption and – even better from an equity perspective – immovable property and inheritance. Still, faster job creation is unlikely to be enough to bring employment rates back to pre-crisis levels, let alone to levels that would offset the impact of population ageing in advanced economies. Boosting employment also requires that more attention be given to growing skills mismatches and low labour force participation, especially among groups such as women and older workers. In most emerging-market economies – China being a notable exception – a key issue is to bring more workers into formal sector activities. In most cases, reducing informality requires rolling-out social protection to all workers, using programmes that best take into account country-specific characteristics and institutional capacities. In countries such as Chile, Indonesia, South Africa and Turkey, reforms of labour market regulation or wage bargaining institutions are also needed to lower hiring and firing costs and prevent low-skilled workers from being priced out of jobs in the formal sector. This report reviews the main growth challenges facing OECD and major non-OECD countries – regrouping them according to the common nature of the key challenges – and gives an overview of the actions taken over the past two years on policy priorities identified in previous issues of Pursuing reform in services is all the more important given the high growth and employment potential of these sectors. This is particularly evident in OECD countries such as Germany, Japan – as part of Abenomics’ third arrow – and beyond, not least in China. Services are also critical for a country’s competitiveness within global value chains and create over half of value-added in cross-border trade. In this regard, another policy area where ample scope for further progress remains is global trade liberalisation. Prime candidates for substantial gains include reducing the high tariffs on a range of products in emerging-market countries and removing barriers in services sectors and other sensitive areas such as agriculture and government procurement in advanced countries. The recent agreement on trade facilitation reached in Bali is a step in the right direction, and hopefully will give multilateral trade negotiations a new impetus, but its impact risks being undermined by the proliferation of various trade-distorting measures and covert barriers to foreign investment. Persistently high unemployment is a concern that cuts across much of Europe, but particularly so in southern and central European countries where long-term unemployment remains high, even where average unemployment has receded since the crisis. The contributing factors, which vary across countries, include various barriers to job creation and workers’ mobility, as well as insufficient support for job-search and skills development. In southern euro area countries, which have been hardest hit by the crisis, more vigorous product market reforms would help boost the impact of the substantial labour market reforms that have been implemented in recent years. More specifically, that means reforming regulations that create barriers to market entry, limit the ability of firms within a market to compete, reduce suppliers’ incentives to compete, or limit the choices and information available to consumers. The 2013 up-date of the OECD PMR indicators shows that reforms in this area have slowed over the past five years, a trend that was already apparent. Nonetheless, several countries implemented significant reforms over the past five years – in particular Greece, Poland, Portugal and the Slovak Republic. Overview of structural reform actions in the policy areas identified as priorities for growth Signs of a broadly-based recovery among advanced economies are becoming more tangible, but remain modest and uneven as governments still face a number of policy challenges. The Great Recession has dented most advanced economies’ potential growth rate, while emerging market economies are currently facing a slowdown and showing signs of vulnerabilities to the eventual normalisation of monetary policy in major advanced economies. The policy challenges include persistently high unemployment, sluggish productivity, high public-sector budget deficit and debt, as well as remaining fragilities in the financial sector and household balance sheets. The relative importance of these challenges varies considerably across countries, not least between advanced countries and major emerging-market economies. This is reflected in significant differences in the labour market and product market performances in recent years and in the degree of economic resilience through the crisis and its aftermath. The present Chapter provides an overview of these major challenges as well as actions taken over the past two years in areas of structural policies that have been identified as essential for long-term growth for OECD countries and major emerging-market economies (Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China and South Africa or BRIICS). Higher structural unemployment, combined with the observed slowdown in productivity – which to some extent may result from persistently weak investment in both physical and knowledge-based capital – means that potential output growth may have declined markedly relative to the pace observed before the crisis. Weaker trend growth complicates the task of bringing public debt-to-GDP ratios down to more prudent levels. The growth challenge faced by many advanced economies is in a number of cases compounded by demographic trends (Johansson et al., 2012). Indeed, the effects of population ageing on the labour force are already being felt in countries such as Germany, Japan and Poland. cases, i.e. countries that could legitimately belong to another group than the one assigned in this exercise. For instance, Finland has been grouped with Austria, Belgium, France and Luxembourg on the basis of challenges such as low labour force participation of older workers and persistently high unemployment, which require policy adjustments in the areas of early retirement schemes, unemployment benefit programmes and labour taxation. However, it could also be seen as belonging to a group comprising mainly Nordic countries. Conversely, a few countries did not, based on these criteria, fit naturally in any group, and hence may be seen to be coming out as outlier in their group. For example, persistently high unemployment is not as big a concern in Austria as it is for other countries in the group. In fact, one country – Iceland – and the EU could not be fitted in anyone group and are not covered in the report. The European countries form four groups, while the rest of the OECD and BRIICS account for another three groups. ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ The importance of having the right institutional arrangements – be it through good co­ordination between levels of government or public employment service and benefit agencies – is emphasised in the recent review of several countries (OECD, 2013a). In this regard, a challenging part of the Italian labour market reform will be to combine efficiently all the elements of support and activation, as training and job-search institutions are provided by regional governments, while provision of the benefits remains at the national level. Moreover, in order to address the jobs skills gap, reforms of vocational education are also advocated (Italy and Portugal), as well as addressing early failures and grade repetitions (Spain). the upper half of OECD countries is explained by a considerable lag in terms of productivity (Ireland being an exception), though these mainly middle-income economies also face significant labour market challenges, not least in addressing a high incidence of long-term unemployment. Their experience of the great recession and on-going recovery has varied greatly – with extreme severity of the downturn in Estonia and Ireland on the one hand and relative resilience in Poland on the other – but for many the general slowdown of growth momentum in advanced economies and export markets uncovered deeper structural issues. Common policy challenges include raising productivity growth as well as addressing specific shortcomings of their labour markets, such as low internal mobility and excluded population groups. Policy priorities for countries facing high long-term unemployment, low labour force participation of specific groups and (with the exception of Ireland) a large productivity gap ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • A recent OECD study on the importance of investment in knowledge-based capital (KBC) to underpin the innovation process illustrated that differences in country levels are associated with diverging patterns of firm-level performance within countries. However, realising the growth opportunities from investment in KBC requires that capital and labour resources be able to flow to firms and sectors that are most productive. Strong competition on product markets combined with bankruptcy laws that do not overly penalise failure are needed to encourage firms to experiment new ideas with uncertain growth opportunities (Andrews and Criscuolo, 2013). Low barriers to the reallocation of capital and jobs across firms help ensuring that the most innovative and productive firms can achieve their growth potential and that the exit of unsuccessful ones is not unduly hampered. In terms of regulatory barriers to competition, several of these countries perform poorly mainly with respect to the nature of state intervention in the economy – as indicated by the relatively high value of the OECD product market regulation index of state control – but entrepreneurs in Israel are also facing high regulatory barriers to setting-up businesses or obtaining permits and licences, with little or no improvement in recent years (see Chapter 2). ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ recommends extending the employers’ responsibility for paying the benefit beyond the current 16 days to at least around three months, or introducing a co-payment in order to develop financial incentives for retaining the employees at work (OECD, 2013o). ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ The French government also lowered labour costs through the introduction of a tax credit based on a company’s gross wage bill for low to middle-wage workers, financed by a hike in the standard VAT rate from 19.6% to 20% and the intermediate VAT rate from 7% to 10%. More recently, the government has announced a plan to replace this tax credit by a reduction in social security contributions paid by employers, a measure to be financed by cuts in public spending. A number of English-speaking countries (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States) and Switzerland form a fifth group of countries for the purpose of this review. They have generally high employment rates and average hours worked but in terms of productivity levels they lag behind the top performers, in particular in terms of multi-factor productivity (with the exception of the United States). While these countries have comparatively high investment in knowledge-based capital (though less so in Australia and New Zealand), benefit from good-quality tertiary education, reasonably well-functioning labour markets and a fairly competitive business environment, they have not enjoyed particularly strong returns on these assets as witnessed by a lacklustre efficiency gains performance and a failure to narrow the productivity gap ( ). Educational outcomes are generally good on average in terms of high-school level performance in reading and science but – with the exception of Canada – with a relatively high variance across students ( Policy priorities for countries facing low productivity growth in spite of relatively high investment in KBC ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ In New Zealand, under the so-called Youth Guarantee, trade academies and free tertiary education places have been established in order to increase achievement of the 16­17 year olds. Controlling health care spending Keeping health care costs under control has been another challenge common to these countries. While the difficulty concerns public spending and efficiency in New Zealand, United Kingdom and Switzerland, high private costs and low coverage of health insurance is the main issue in the United States. Overall, the growth of healthcare spending has somewhat stalled in these countries – as in most OECD countries – during the recession years, but with the recovery gaining firmer ground, the rising trend is likely to return. Greater hospital efficiency and better chronic care management are notably advocated in New Zealand and Switzerland, as part of a set of recommendations to reduce public healthcare sector inefficiencies. The UK authorities are in the process of implementing a potentially far-reaching health care reform, which will re-organise care purchasing in England and Wales. Purchasing of care is newly transferred to clinical commissioning groups led by general practitioners and some parts of the public health budget will be transferred to local governments, with a view to cut down on costs while improving productivity in the sector. introduced also a new recommendation in the area of active labour market policies for the United States. In the aftermath of the crisis, both unemployment benefits and active labour market policies had been temporarily augmented, but are currently being scaled back again, as programmes have expired or are affected by the general fiscal retrenchment under way. Unemployment has been edging down, but not as fast as expected. Also, the depressed labour market has led to people withdrawing from the labour force, discouraged by the poor job prospects. In this context, inflows into disability schemes are becoming an issue. With 7.2% of the population of 20­64 year olds receiving disability benefits, the United States have experienced one of the largest increases since 2006 and comes close to the European levels now, also when measured by incidence of sickness absence among full-time employees. A high share of working-age population on disability benefits has also been an issue in the United Kingdom, where a new work capacity test is bringing people back to the labour market. While finally showing signs of a more robust rebound from the recession and exiting deflation, Japan is still facing an important fiscal consolidation challenge that needs to be underpinned by structural policies to boost potential growth in the face of rapid ageing. Korea’s growth has been relatively robust but its more immediate growth prospects are burdened by already high levels of household debt. Germany’s recent economic performance has been solid, with record low unemployment and a sound fiscal position, but apart from the cyclical upswing from the recession, medium-term potential growth remains subdued. Policy priorities for countries facing rapid ageing, low participation of women and weak productivity in services ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ Korea’s 2012 free trade agreement with the United States should enhance its limited openness and help to attract inward FDI. Japan is experimenting with deregulation of certain professions in specialized zones. More importantly, it is participating in Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, while also engaged in talks on trade agreements with both the European Union and the United States that could be instrumental to much needed opening up of the protected sectors. Another common reform recommendation aimed at boosting the potential growth is a general rebalancing of the tax system. Japan applies high corporate taxation and Korea’s stands at around the OECD average while their indirect taxes, in particular consumption tax rate, are low. The Japanese government faced with more immediate fiscal consolidation needs, has indeed decided to implement a significant increase in the consumption tax rate (from 5 to 8%) in April 2014. A further increase to 10% rate is planned for October 2015 under the condition that the economic situation remains favourable. Also, a temporary surcharge on the CIT that was introduced to fund earthquake reconstruction costs is lifted a year earlier, which will help to ease the tax burden on businesses. Meanwhile, German tax structure is skewed towards labour, notably because of high social security contributions. While its standard VAT rate stands at 19%, there is a scope for raising more revenues through the abolition of reduced rates VAT rates, as well as via higher environmental and real estate taxes. Easing the demographic pressures by facilitating the entry of women on the labour market The longer-term challenge of ageing requires all possible measures to boost labour force participation. All three countries are among the fastest ageing economies in the OECD. For instance, in Japan the working-age population is projected to diminish by 40% by 2050. Extending working life careers is an obvious policy option, especially since Japan has the highest life-expectancy in the world. The government has introduced measures to encourage longer work, including a 2013 law requiring firms to keep all workers wishing to work until 65 (OECD, 2013h). Moreover, in all three economies, women – who particularly in Japan and Korea tend to have high graduation rates but very low labour market participation – represent an important potential pool of skilled labour ( The final group of countries comprises major non-OECD emerging-market economies (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and South Africa – or BRIICS) and lower-income OECD countries (Chile, Turkey and Mexico). These countries have generally demonstrated good resilience during the crisis – growth in GDP per capita has been stronger over the 2006-2011 period than the earlier 5-year period – though they have shown signs of slowing more recently, related for some of them to commodity price developments, but also to weaknesses in fundamentals. At the current juncture, they face significant risks, arising from planned withdrawal of unconventional monetary policies in major economies that could have particularly de-stabilising effects on emerging markets. Moreover, having experienced a surge in credit growth in recent years (Brazil, China, Russia and Turkey), some of them show signs of potential vulnerabilities in the banking sector. ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ Other factors potentially hindering the allocation of resources to most productive firms and sectors include pervasive state control of major parts of the economy – distorting competition – weak legal infrastructure and shallow financial markets. Despite recent improvements, China, Russia, South Africa and Turkey continue to have among the highest regulatory barriers to competition in the form of public ownership and poor governance of state-owned enterprises. In terms of legal infrastructure, weak and variable contract enforcements (China, Mexico) and protection of property rights (Mexico) create legal uncertainty, deterring investment and, in some cases, preventing the most productive firms from achieving their growth potential (Dougherty, 2013). Better enforcement of the – implying stronger judiciary independence or an overall strengthening of institutions – is thus a policy priority for China, Mexico and Russia. Progress is often slow in these areas, as they require the build-up of human capital and institutional capacity in the public sector. Nonetheless, some action has been taken: ; China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, National Bureau of Statistics; Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios); , Vol. 152, No. 3-4. Furthermore, just like in many higher-income countries, a general re-balancing of the protection between temporary and permanent contracts, as well as from jobs to workers, is needed. High protection of workers on permanent contracts tends to hurt the youth most, making their labour force participation and employment more difficult (Pagés and Montenegro, 2007). A reduction in the strictness of job protection combined with a strengthening of the protection of income, via an extension of the coverage of social insurance systems is one way forward to draw labour force out of informality. , panel B). Too high minimum wages – especially if set uniformly across age groups and regions – truncate the earnings distribution and reduce demand for lower skilled workers in the formal sector (OECD, 2004), with particularly adverse effect in economies characterised by relatively young and less-educated workforce (Kantor et al., 2006). In Indonesia, the minimum wage – at the level of over 60% of the average wage – is linked to inflation, which can result in further increases relative to the median wage. The minimum wage in Turkey stands at over 70% of the median, creating challenges given the regional disparities in productivity. In South Africa, the wage bargaining system more broadly contributes to high labour costs relative to productivity, low wage flexibility and strong labour market duality. This is because it allows for wages negotiated between large established firms and unions to be extended to all (including non-unionised) firms in the sector by bargaining councils, putting small firms at a disadvantage and hampering job opportunities for the unemployed (OECD, 2013l). Except for the implementation of a wage subsidy for youth in South Africa, there has been no significant action taken recently in other countries the area of wage setting. Overall, this group of countries has taken relatively few reform actions in the areas seen as priorities for sustaining high growth rates. Despite the relatively good performance at the onset of the recent downturn, many of these countries have run into domestic bottlenecks – not least in terms of infrastructure – that are hampering the catching-up process as well as the flexibility of the economy. Progress on a number of recommendations to extend social protection has been piecemeal, despite the help it could provide in addressing informality, and thereby in raising public revenues, as well as in allowing workers to increase their skills. Mexico, however, stands out, with a significant reform agenda adopted thanks to notable cross-party support ( ). Also, in China, last year’s Third Plenum outlined an ambitious and potentially comprehensive reform plan, although details of the numerous reforms are still to be spelled out. Public subsidies for agricultural production distort efficient resources allocation and limit productivity gains in many countries or regions covering a large part of the OECD (European Union, Iceland, India, Japan, Korea, Norway, Turkey, Switzerland and the United States). Overall, producer support increased slightly after reaching a historical low in 2011. The highest public support to farm receipts is recorded in Japan, Korea, Norway and Switzerland where it spans from 56-63%, while the EU’s support is at the OECD average of 19% and other countries with a reform recommendation in this area are below the average, with 7% in the United States. Among advanced economies, producer support has been on a long-term declining trend, but in some of the emerging market economies (notably China and Indonesia) the support has been increasing, albeit from low levels. Changes in recent years were in many other countries driven by developments on international markets rather than by explicit policy changes (OECD, 2013m) so important scope for progress remains. In the United States, the recently approved Farm bill could have potentially far reaching impact, as subsidies are set to decrease over the next five years. In Japan, the government has proposed phasing out certain subsidies related to rice production. obstacles that continue to hinder worldwide trade. A significant portion of them concern anti-dumping and countervailing duties, but several measures introduced in the aftermath of the crisis have also been in areas such as standards and technical regulations, public procurement, export subsidies and firm bailouts (Global Trade Alert, 2013). And, since 2009, the year that saw a peak in the incidence of trade-distorting policies, the introduction of new trade restrictions continue to exceed the number of trade-facilitating measures. The total number of trade-restricting measures implemented by G20 countries between 2009 and 2013 – and that are still in place – account for nearly 4 per cent of world merchandise trade. recommendations are primarily focused on achieving higher level and growth of GDP per capita, governments are typically pursuing a broader economic policy agenda. For instance, G20 countries are engaged in co-ordinated efforts to realize strong, sustainable and balanced growth, which involves, among other objectives, restoring fiscal sustainability and rebalancing current accounts. Furthermore, countries are not only concerned with improvement in their citizens’ material living standard but also with other dimensions of their well-being such as income equality and environmental quality. This section takes stock of the possible Income inequality, which has grown continuously over the past three decades, widened further during the great recession. The increase in inequality in household’s market income (income from employment, capital and self-employment) between 2007 and 2010 was larger than that seen in the previous 12 years (OECD, 2013n). Although such rise was largely mitigated by social transfers, the group at the lowest income level has suffered a larger loss in disposable income than the top-income group, or saw a smaller improvement ( For example, measures advocated to boost labour force participation – such as actions to facilitate full-time participation of women through improved access to affordable childcare or those to reduce informality by extending social protection to categories of workers not covered – can improve the budget balance in the medium-to-long run through stronger private sector employment but also entail substantial up-front budgetary costs and are therefore deficit-increasing in the short run. In addition to reducing public savings, these measures may also lower household savings for precautionary motives and thus contribute to weaken the current account position in the short term. On the other hand, such reforms are generally seen as desirable from an income distribution perspective as they can contribute to narrow income gap between genders and between workers with different labour contracts. Impact of growth enhancing reforms on other policy objectives – main channels Budgetary implications of reforms in the short term depend on the extent to which their implementation entails initial expenditure cutbacks or – more often the case – additional public resources at least in the short term. In the long term, however, the effect on budget will much depend on whether reforms raise income via higher employment or stronger productivity. Policy actions that boost growth through stronger job creation and employment gains in the private sector may improve the government budget balance (as a ratio of GDP). They do so by increasing tax revenues as well as by reducing the relative size of the public sector in the overall economy, which may offset initial budget costs of the reform. In contrast, reforms that boost potential growth through stronger productivity gains do not necessarily improve the budget balance in the long run. The reason is that while stronger productivity brings more tax revenues, it also raises major components of spending such as public-sector wages – which tend to follow private-sector wages and hence productivity – as well as many types of transfers, which are often indexed to income. The side-effects of growth-enhancing structural reforms on other policy objectives may be seen as particularly important for countries facing most acute needs for fiscal consolidation, for a rebalancing of current accounts and for alleviating income inequality. This sub-section focuses on those countries’ various objectives (given their starting point) and provides a stylised overview of the extent to which actions taken are helpful or not in addressing these objectives. A more comprehensive overview of recommendations and their side-effects for each country is provided in Annex  Countries needing a short- to medium-term consolidation larger than OECD average to reduce debt to 60% of GDP by 2060 (GRC, JPN, PRT, USA, ESP, IRL, GBR, SVK, FRA, ISL, POL) recommendations and where actions have been taken for the five countries with the largest current account surpluses (China, Germany, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland) as well as for the five countries with the largest deficits (Brazil, Canada, India, United Kingdom and the United States). The size of current account imbalances for the purpose of this exercise is measured by an indicator that incorporates the ratio of a country’s current account balance to its GDP as well as to world GDP, in line with Cournède Countries selected are those with the largest current account surpluses and deficits, in line with estimations of Cournède et al recommendations that have an impact inequality for the selected 11 countries. When a specific recommendation applies, the country is mentioned in brackets and when action has been taken, the country is highlighted in bold. provides an overview of the likely impact – mostly in the short term – of policy actions implemented in line with  2013 policy recommendations on other policy objectives Reduce the entitlement of disability benefits, and disincentives for low income earners’ labour participation – ~ ~ – – ~ ~ – – – ~ – – ~ ~ – – – – – + indicates positive contribution to policy objective whereas – indicates negative contribution, except for current account, where + indicates strengthening of current account and – indicates the weakening. Therefore, reforms with + signs help deficit countries to rebalance their current account but do not help surplus countries. Conversely, reforms with – signs help surplus countries to rebalance their current account but do not help deficit countries. ~ indicates ambiguous contribution often due to coexistence of opposing contributions or strong dependence on the circumstance under which the reform is implemented. Blank cell corresponds to the case where no direct impact is expected.  2013 policy recommendations and their impact on other policy objectives – – – – – – – ~ ~ ~ – ~ – – ~ – ~ – ~ – ~ ~ – – – ~ – – – ~ – – – – – – – ~ ~ – ~ – ~ – – – – – ~ ~ – – ~ – – – – ~ – ~ – – ~ ~ – – ~ – ~ ~ ~ ~ – – – ~ ~ ~ ~ – – – – – ~ – – – – – – ~ ~ – – – – – ~ – – – – – – – – – – ~ – – ~ – ~ ~ – – – – ~ – ~ – ~ – – – – – – ~ – – – ~ – – ~ – ~ – ~ ~ ~ – ~ ~ – – – – – – ~ ~ – ~ ~ – – ~ – – ~ – ~ – ~ – ~ ~ – ~ – – – ~ – – – ~ ~ – – – – ~ – – ~ – – – – – – – – – – ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ – – – – – – – – ~ – ~ ~ – – – – – – + indicates positive contribution to policy objective whereas – indicates negative contribution. For current account position, + indicates strengthening of current account and – indicates the weakening. Therefore, reforms with + signs help deficit countries to rebalance their current account but do not help surplus countries. Conversely, reforms with – signs help surplus countries to rebalance their current account but do not help deficit countries. ~ indicates ambiguous contribution often due to coexistence of opposing contributions or strong dependence on the circumstance under which the reform is implemented. Blank cell corresponds to the case where no direct impact is expected. Reducing regulatory barriers to competition: Progress since 2008 and scope for further reform Reducing regulatory barriers to competition: Progress made since 2008 and scope for further reform Pro-competition regulation in product markets can help boost living standards. Many empirical studies have shown that competition can overall raise output per capita by increasing investment and employment as well as by encouraging companies to be more innovative and efficient, thereby lifting productivity (e.g. Bouis and Duval, 2011; Bourlès et al. 2010; Conway et al., 2006; Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2005). In light of these economic gains, countries have, step by step, removed obsolete or badly-designed regulations in product markets over the past decades, reducing state involvement in business sectors, making it easier for entrepreneurs to create firms and to expand them, and facilitating the entry of foreign products and firms. While in some cases regulation was largely removed, in others it was replaced by better-designed legislation that can even help to enhance competition. To measure a country’s regulatory stance and track reform progress over time the OECD developed an economy-wide indicator set of product market regulations (PMR) in 1998 (Nicoletti et al., 1999), which was then updated in 2003 (Conway et al., 2005) and 2008 (Wölfl et al., 2009). By now, the indicators have become an essential element of the OECD policy surveillance as they enhance the knowledge of regulatory practices in OECD countries and the potential for investigating their link with economic performance. They are an integral part of the The development of PMR indicators for countries covered for the first time has been done in co­operation with the world Bank for countries from Latin America and the Caribbean and in co­operation with the European Commission for non-OECD EU member countries. : This can be the case if regulation limits sellers’ ability to set the prices for goods and services; limits the freedom of suppliers to advertise or market their products or services; significantly raise the costs of production for some suppliers relative to others (especially by treating incumbents differently from new entrants). Taking into account the extent to which the measured indicators can vary according to the relative importance or weight put on each specific aspect of legislation in their construction, the results indicate a similar stance of overall regulation across a majority of OECD countries. Nonetheless, based on the indicator values, countries can be separated into three broad groups – those with an indicator value below the cross-country average, those that cannot be significantly distinguished from the average, and those with a value above the average ( The relative position of countries varies somewhat across the three high-level indicators. For instance, the Netherlands have a lower level of state control than other OECD countries, while the lowest barriers to entrepreneurship are found in Slovak Republic, New Zealand, the Netherlands and Denmark. Barriers to foreign trade and investment are low in many European countries and Australia. Among non-OECD countries, state control is the lowest in Peru, Latvia, El Salvador, Malta and Nicaragua while Russia, Bulgaria, Colombia and South Africa, have lower barriers to entrepreneurship than the other non-OECD countries covered in this report. As regards foreign trade and investment, Bulgaria, Romania, Malta, Lithuania, Latvia, South Africa and Nicaragua are among the most open countries, although only the first two are more open than the average OECD country. Despite these differences, there is a tendency for OECD and non-OECD countries with a competition-friendly regulatory stance in one of the three areas, to also have competition-friendly regulations in the other two areas. OECD countries have considerably liberalised their product markets over the past 15 years ( ). Several OECD countries have implemented important reforms over the past 5 years, often triggered by the economic crisis. The country with the largest improvement in the overall PMR score is Greece (-0.54), followed by Poland (-0.34), Portugal (-0.40) and the Slovak Republic (-0.26). While Greece is still among the OECD countries with relatively strict product market regulations, it has made a substantial leap forward. There has also been some progress in Italy (­0.20) which has also faced market pressures for structural reforms since 2011. Countries displayed different extents of regulatory reform over the period 2008 to 2013 ). 22 OECD countries have eased restrictions on trade and investments (notably by phasing out differential treatments of foreign suppliers), 30 OECD countries have lowered barriers to entrepreneurship (in particular by streamlining administrative procedures for start-ups, simplifying rules and procedures and improving access to information about regulation) and 24 countries have reduced the level of state control (in particular by removing special voting rights and legal or constitutional restrictions to the sale of government stakes and or by abolishing price controls or improving their design). In terms of sectors, progress has continued to slow in air and road transport as well as in the energy and retail sectors ( which plots the change in a country’s PMR score over a certain sub-period against the level of the PMR score at the beginning of that sub-period. The trend lines are downward sloping in all three panels, suggesting that countries with the strictest regulations have implemented the biggest reforms. However, the trend lines have flattened over time, while the noise around the trend has increased. Over the most recent sub-period, Greece, Poland, Portugal and the Slovak Republic have made comparatively large reforms given their regulatory stance in 2008. The OECD’s PMR indicators are based on a large amount of information on regulatory structures and policies that is collected through a questionnaire sent to governments in OECD and non-OECD countries. All of the questions are closed questions that can either be answered with numerical values (e.g. the number of bodies that need to be contacted to start a business) or by selecting an answer from a pre-defined set of menu options (e.g. the question whether a specific regulation exists can be answered with : Pervasiveness of state ownership across 30 business sectors measured as the share of sectors in which the state controls at least one firm. : Government stakes in the largest firms in 6 network sectors (electricity, gas, rail transport, air transport, postal services and telecommunication). : The government’s communication strategy and efforts to reduce and simplify the administrative burden of interacting with the government. Restrictiveness of a country’s FDI rules in 22 sectors in terms of foreign equity limitations, screening or approval mechanisms, restrictions on the employment of foreigners as key personnel and operational restrictions (e.g. restrictions on branching and on capital repatriation or on land ownership) The random weights technique consists of using randomly drawn rather than equal weights to aggregate the 18 low-level indicators into the three high-level indicators. Starting with the low-level indicators, the technique uses 10 000 randomly generated weights to calculate 10 000 values of the three high-level indicators. The high-level indicators are directly computed from the low-level indicators to avoid making assumptions about the nesting structure of the mid-level indicators. The overall PMR indicator is then computed as the simple average of the three high-level indicators, i.e. at this final step of aggregation no randomisation is applied. The reason is that randomisation at such an aggregate level would lead to very wide confidence intervals. The random weights are drawn from a uniform distribution between zero and one and are then normalised so that they sum to unity. ; China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, National Bureau of Statistics; Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios); , Vol. 152, No. 3-4; Panel B: OECD (2013), Public expenditure on childcare services¹ Childcare expenditure cover children under three years old enrolled in childcare and children between three and five years old enrolled in pre-school. Childcare refers to formal day-care services, such as day-care centres and family day-care. Pre-school includes kindergartens and day-care centres which usually provide an educational content as well as traditional care for children (ISCED 0 under UNESCO’s classification system). Local government spending may not be properly captured in the data for federal countries. The OECD average excludes Chile, Iceland and Turkey in Panel A and excludes Australia, Chile, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico and New Zealand in Panel B. Data for India is the average for 2010 of the states of Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh and therefore may not be representative of nation-wide outcomes. PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Preliminary version – Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed, PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Preliminary version – Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed, 