The global recovery has been underway for some time now, but it remains uneven. Emerging market economies are growing strongly, while growth in OECD economies has been insufficient to significantly reduce unemployment from its post-crisis peak with all of the attendant human and social costs. Global payment imbalances are widening again. How sustainable post recession global growth will be? Policy driven recovery has still not been fully replaced by self sustained, job rich growth, especially in advanced economies. At the same time policy space is reaching its limits, in both the fiscal and monetary policy domains. Monetary policies have been stretched to their limits, and public budgets are in need of consolidation – and indeed most OECD governments are tightening fiscal policy in 2011 and beyond. In addition, the recovery takes place against the background of permanent scars from the recession that, while difficult to assess precisely, are associated with output losses in most advanced economies that are likely to persist for several years. In such a scenario structural policy reforms provide the main available policy lever to speed up the recovery and raise global growth over the coming years, while at the same time offering significant contribution to global rebalancing and fiscal consolidation, as discussed in Chapter 1 of this year’s edition. Financial markets are also doing a better job at pricing longer-term economic prospects – and therefore the effects of reforms (or lack thereof) – in bond yields now than in the past, further strengthening the case for action. Although more needs to be done to address key issues such as systemic risk or non-bank financial institutions, financial regulation reform is on its way, with capital, liquidity and leverage ratios for banks due to be raised or introduced across the OECD. Efforts need to be stepped up in other areas, where structural reforms have been rather modest since the start of the crisis. Structural policy reforms have gained prominence in the G20 context since the Mutual Assessment Process was set up at the 2009 G20 summit in Pittsburgh. The OECD has relied on to contribute to assessing the policy commitments made by G20 countries and identifying further reforms to improve global outcomes. Indeed this new edition of identifies five key priorities to boost long-term growth for each individual OECD country – including Chile, Estonia, Israel and Slovenia, which joined the organisation in 2010 – and, for the first time, for key emerging countries with which the OECD works closely, namely Brazil, Russia, China, India, Indonesia and South Africa – the so-called BRIICS. These recommendations provide readily-available benchmarks against which domestic reform plans can be, and indeed have been assessed. inter alia strengthening education systems, relaxing stringent product market regulations and addressing the more specific challenges of labour market informality and – in some cases – the quality of governance and legal systems. identifies for each OECD country and, for the first time, for key emerging economies (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and South Africa, the so-called BRIICS), five reform priorities that would be most effective in delivering sustained growth over the next decade. These recommendations are determined based on a mapping between the performance shortfalls – measured by labour productivity and labour utilisation gaps best performers – and policy weaknesses of each individual country. The main conclusions from this priority-setting exercise, which are summed up in an overview chapter (Chapter 1) and described in greater detail in individual country notes (Chapter 2) are as follows: Higher income OECD countries face a range of policy challenges and can roughly be broken down into two groups. The first group consists primarily of continental European countries, which need to raise labour utilisation. In consequence, improving the design of benefit systems, addressing labour market dualism through job protection reform and shifting the tax burden away from labour are common recommendations, although product market reforms also feature prominently. The remaining relatively wealthy OECD countries face a more balanced set of challenges, with a greater focus on labour productivity – especially for the Asian member countries – and with reforms of network sector regulation, FDI restrictions, tax structure and public sectors frequently recommended. Lower income OECD countries – including Chile, Estonia, Israel and Slovenia that joined the OECD in 2010 – and the BRIICS face far more challenges related to their education systems and product market regulation. Reforms in these areas are aimed at enhancing productivity. Labour informality also raises specific policy challenges in these countries. In many cases, the nature of policy priorities for the BRIICS is similar in content to that for low-income OECD countries, though the amount of needed reform is typically greater in the BRIICS. Recommendations for the BRIICS and some lower-income OECD countries also include in several cases reforms of legal systems and contract enforcement as well as improvements in governance systems that would address corruption. e.g.  in retail trade or liberal professions), fewer administrative burdens on business and removal of barriers to foreign direct investment. Some of the identified priorities could also go a long way towards preventing high unemployment from becoming permanent, another important concern in the current environment. Many of the labour market policy responses to the crisis – such as the scaling-up of short-time work schemes or extensions in the length and coverage of unemployment benefits – helped dampen the unemployment impact of the recession and mitigated hardship on workers. As the economic conditions evolve, new policy initiatives could help strengthen the job content of the recovery. Such reforms include increased spending on and reform of active labour market policies, reduced labour market dualism through job protection reform and improved design of social transfer programmes. Growth-enhancing structural reforms can also have beneficial knock-on effects on current account imbalances, as examined in detail in Chapter 5. Despite some narrowing during the crisis, global imbalances are still wide in both OECD and non-OECD countries and are likely to remain so in the absence of policy action. While structural reforms are not generally designed to address global imbalances, they can affect current accounts by influencing households’ and firms’ saving and investment decisions, as well as by altering public saving and investment. New empirical analysis presented in this chapter suggests that a number of structural reforms that are desirable Overall, a combination of fiscal tightening in OECD countries, product market reforms in Germany and Japan, and increased public health spending (by 2 percentage points of GDP) and financial market liberalisation in China could reduce the size of global imbalances by about one-third. contains a special chapter on housing (Chapter 4), an area where misguided policies contributed to trigger the recent crisis and could now slow down labour mobility and the job recovery. The chapter presents new housing market policy indicators and OECD empirical analysis, with the following main findings: Innovations in mortgage markets should be coupled with appropriate regulatory oversight and prudent banking regulations. Financial liberalisation and mortgage innovations have boosted the access to housing of previously credit-constrained households, but regulatory reforms in mortgage markets may also be behind noticeable increases in house prices – by an average of 30% in OECD countries between the early 1980s and the mid-2000s – and in house price volatility. Last but not least, this year’s issue of features a chapter on health care (Chapter 6), a key contributor to individual well-being and an important driver of long-term economic growth. The OECD has assembled new cross-country comparative data on health policies and health care system efficiency, which show that there is room in all countries surveyed to improve the effectiveness of their public health care spending: For more than one-third of countries, better efficiency could improve life expectancy as much in the ten years to 2017 as in the previous ten years, while keeping health care spending constant. An Overview of Going for Growth Priorities in 2011 This initial chapter of Going for Growth identifies five structural reform priorities for each OECD country, for the European Union as a whole, and for the BRIICS – Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and South Africa. The recommendations are aimed at addressing variations in labour productivity and labour use across these countries. Moderate and high income (mainly European) OECD countries need to improve their labour use mainly by reforming their benefit and job protection systems and labour taxes. The relatively wealthy Asian member countries face a more balanced set of challenges, with a greater focus on labour productivity. The reform challenges for lower income OECD countries and the BRIICS relate to their education systems and product market regulation, as well as labour informality. reports have been published by the OECD every year since 2005. The  for the methodology used to select policy priorities and  for the list of recommendations for each country. As described in previous editions of has been expanded to cover the four new member countries that joined the OECD during 2010, namely Chile, Estonia, Israel and Slovenia, as well the BRIICS – Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and South Africa – key non-member countries with which the OECD works closely. policy reforms that affect their residents’ long-term living standards. Structural policy reforms are central to the mission of the OECD, and the analysis has been used in the Mutual Assessment Process of the G20 since the Pittsburgh Summit. Since policy recommendations are only reconsidered or set every other year (in odd years), this is the fourth time that a full set of recommendations has been made for OECD member countries since the first edition of (OECD, 2005) and the first time it has been made systematically for the BRIICS. The methodology used identifies policy recommendations based on their ability to improve long-term material living standards. The reference performance measure in this regard is gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, given its contemporaneous availability and relatively broad coverage despite its potential drawbacks. Broader measures of well-being are under development as part of the OECD’s Global Project on Measuring the Progress of Societies, in part following up on the findings of the Stiglitz-Sen-Fitoussi Commission. While many alternative well-being measures are highly correlated with GDP per capita (see OECD, 2006a), broader measures may be important complements to evaluate issues such as, for example, income distribution, poverty, or environmental sustainability. Some measures that extend GDP numbers to non-market production, and thereby may come closer to indicators of well‑being, are explored in In last year’s edition of Recognising that policy reforms often pursue multiple objectives rather than just income growth, this chapter also looks at the side-effects of structural policy recommendations on two other policy objectives, namely achieving fiscal sustainability and reducing current account imbalances (see also Chapter 5). The crisis is writ large in this year’s , vividly demonstrating the urgency of reforms in the financial sector for restoring stability and protecting living standards over the long-term (see  e.g.  in retail trade or liberal professions), administrative burdens on business and international barriers that restrict foreign direct investment (FDI). The dramatic effects of the crisis on economies globally has made many previously-identified structural policy priorities even more urgent – particularly those that would allow countries’ slack labour resources to remain in contact with the labour market. These include increasing spending on and reforming active labour market policies, reducing labour market dualism through job protection reforms or making social transfer programmes more conducive to employment. All these labour and product market reforms could help to reduce the extent of hysteresis, the process whereby jobless workers end up being unable to seek and find employment. Moderate and high income OECD countries face a range of policy challenges and can roughly be broken down into two groups. The first group consists primarily of continental European countries, which need to raise labour utilisation, and where reforms of benefit systems, job protection and labour taxes are common recommendations, although product market reforms also feature prominently. The remaining relatively wealthy OECD countries face a more balanced set of challenges, with a greater focus on labour productivity – especially for the Asian member countries – and with reforms of network sector regulation, FDI restrictions, tax structure and public sectors frequently recommended. Lower income OECD countries – including the new members – and the BRIICS face far more challenges related to their education systems and product market regulation, reforms of which are aimed at enhancing productivity levels. Labour informality also raises policy issues in these countries. In many cases, the nature of policy priorities for the BRIICS is similar in content to that for low-income OECD countries, though the amount of needed reform is typically greater in the BRIICS. Recommendations for the BRIICS and some lower income OECD countries also include in several cases reforms of legal systems and contract enforcement as well as improvements in governance systems that would address corruption. Structural reforms are mainly aimed at enhancing long-term income levels but could also yield important co-benefits for fiscal balances. For example, reforms that boost sustainable employment levels are likely to be most helpful to fiscal consolidation. The urgency of many other types of structural reforms has also increased. In particular, improvements in tax systems, or education and health care efficiency gains could ease fiscal deficits (see Chapter 6 on health). Structural reforms can also have important and beneficial knock-on effects on current account imbalances. Such imbalances may be affected more by some types of structural reforms than others. In this chapter, conclusions are drawn regarding different types of growth and welfare-enhancing structural reforms that would also help reduce saving-investment imbalances, depending on whether a country is in fiscal surplus or deficit, and whether it has an external surplus or deficit. For instance, in economies characterised by current account surpluses and fiscal deficits, easing product market regulations in sheltered sectors would not only boost growth but could also contribute to reduce current account surpluses by increasing investment, and to some extent help consolidate public finances; and in dual surplus countries with weak social protection, a strengthening of social benefits would enhance welfare by reducing the risk of hardship and could lower both saving surpluses (see Chapter 5 on current account imbalances). The recent financial crisis and its subsequent severe impact on growth and employment have been a forceful reminder of the vital role of prudential regulation in financial markets for helping to preserve overall economic stability. Well-functioning financial sectors not only reduce the cost of producing and trading goods and services but also reduce the risks of instability. And given that financial crises generate long-lasting output losses (Furceri and Mourougane, 2009; Cerra and Saxena, 2008), enhanced stability could also contribute to higher long-term living standards. At the same time, when evaluating the current proposals and actions to strengthen prudential regulation frameworks, attention needs to be paid to preserving the well-established benefits from financial market competition. Competition matters for efficient financial intermediation, and for the pricing and quality of financial products. It can also facilitate access of firms and households to external financing and financial services, with potentially far-reaching consequences for economic growth and living standards. Fortunately, however, previous OECD analysis finds only limited trade-offs between stability and competition, and even suggests that stronger supervisors could go along with more competitive banking systems (OECD, 2010a, Chapter 6). Similarly, regulatory reform would have to strike the right balance between stability on the one hand and the cost of capital on the other. Indeed, strengthening prudential regulation might raise the long-term cost of capital with permanent adverse effects on capital accumulation and income levels. For instance, a 1 percentage point increase in core capital requirements may lead to a rise in the lending spread – the spread between bank lending and borrowing rates – by about 16 basis points, (MAG, 2010). If reform were to raise the cost of capital in proportion with the share of bank lending in the external financing of non-financial businesses, Cournede’s (2010) estimates would suggest a negative impact on potential output in the order of 0.2% in the United States and 0.6% in the euro area (assuming an offsetting monetary policy response). However, the aforementioned calculations omit the gains from the new capital framework, which include the reduced likelihood and cost of financial crises and improvements in the quality of capital allocation across the economy. These effects have been estimated to more than offset any gross costs of the new regulations, by a wide margin (BCBS, 2010). For the BRIICS, the challenges are somewhat different. Financial markets are typically much shallower than in most OECD countries, implying low levels of financial inclusion and a more limited role for financial intermediation in capital allocation. To some extent, this reflects more stringent regulation, in particular larger barriers to entry, and higher state ownership. International evidence suggests that high state-ownership of banks tends to depress financial sector development, with negative implications for long term living standards, especially for countries with less developed financial markets (see Levine et. al. Together with actions by individual countries and the EU, a comprehensive regulatory reform is being discussed under the auspices of the G20 in recognition of the need for internationally co-ordinated rules to strengthen financial stability, in particular by reducing opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. One vital component of such a regulatory regime has been agreed in general principles, in the form of the Basel III agreement. This agreement effectively triples the size of capital reserves that banks must hold against loses over the period 2011-18, by raising the Tier 1 capital ratio from 2% to 4.5% of risk‑weighted assets, and adding a further 2.5% buffer. By strengthening global capital and liquidity regulations, banks should have larger buffers to cushion downturns. These new requirements will be phased in gradually, and US and EU banks already meet them, although they may want to keep a discretionary buffer above the regulatory mimima. As a result, any adverse impacts on growth over the coming years are likely to be very small, though they could reach between 0.1 and 0.6 percentage points of GDP growth per annum for Japan depending on the extent of credit-supply effects (based on MAG, 2010). While many other details of the new financial sector reforms are still to be determined, broad consensus has been achieved on a number of principles beyond the strengthening of capital requirements (also see OECD, 2010b; 2010c; OECD, 2010d): Design macro-prudential policy so as to mitigate procyclical build-up of systemic risk and help alleviating the accumulation of credit-driven asset price bubbles. Develop tools to reduce the pro-cyclicality of the financial system such as contingent capital buffers with capital surcharges being applied on top of prevailing micro- prudential capital ratios, dynamic loss provisioning, or risk weights that are a function of aggregate borrowers’ leverage. Establish robust institutions for macro-prudential regulation, with adequate resources and access to information to develop early warning and systemic assessment tools. for major cross-border firms (see below); and changes to financial infrastructure that reduce contagion risks.  national authorities have an effective toolkit for bank resolution, harmonised as far as possible;  all systematically cross-border institutions have functioning stability groups, supported by regularly updated living wills;  burden-sharing agreements enshrined in national laws exist to limit ring fencing between countries. Strengthen accounting standards. The International and US Financial Accounting Standards Boards (IASB and FASB) have been considering approaches to improve and simplify accounting for financial instruments, provisioning and impairment recognition, and are converging, albeit slowly. In the OECD, individual countries and jurisdictions have taken initiatives to reform financial regulation to tackle the failures that led to the financial and economic crisis. Measures to strengthen framework conditions in financial markets have nevertheless proceeded at different speeds across countries, advancing faster in the United States. In particular: In the United States, the financial reform legislation enacted in July 2010 establishes a consumer financial protection entity, creates a systemic risk regulator (the Financial Stability Oversight Council), gives regulatory bodies the authority to determine which derivatives should be cleared through centralised clearing houses, creates a banking liquidation authority and a pre-funded liquidation fund, and bans banks from using their regulatory capital to finance some categories of risky investments (the At the national level, some EU countries have taken measures on their own. Some countries have imposed (France, Germany and Sweden) a levy on banks to reduce taxpayer costs of future bank failures and financial crises. Germany imposed a ban on naked short-selling of certain types of securities. In the United Kingdom, the authorities undertook in the second half of 2010 a three-month consultation period on a reform that intends to place both firm-specific and macro-prudential regulation (through new powers) under the auspices of the Bank of England. The new regulatory system is not expected to be in place before 2012 to allow the financial sector to adjust. Moreover, an independent commission has been given one year to report on the issue of separating retail and investment banking and the need to break-up large banks. A levy on banks will be implemented starting from January 2011 to encourage banks to move away from risky funding. Outside the EU, Switzerland imposed tighter liquidity and solvency requirements on the country’s two biggest banks, including a leverage ratio and a capital buffer that varies over the profit cycle. Areas where international coordination still needs to advance further include the regulation of the over-the-counter derivatives market and accounting standards. Regarding the former, it is important that authorities across both sides of the Atlantic agree on a common set of derivatives that should be traded through central clearing houses in order to avoid shopping for the most favourable set of rules. On the latter, it is important not to lose momentum in converging on global high quality financial reporting standards in spite of the postponement from June to end-2011 of the deadline for convergence fixed by the G20. Finally, international coordination of prudential supervision is particularly important for countries in a monetary union. Upgrading regulation and supervision to reduce risk in the euro area calls for an effective system of cross-border supervision and an integrated crisis management framework to reduce moral hazard. Examining both OECD and BRIICS countries’ growth rates over the past decade compared with their income level a decade earlier ( ) reveals that there has been some convergence in income levels. There were a number of exceptions, however, as higher relative levels were maintained by Luxembourg, Norway and to a lesser extent the United States, and some OECD countries including Italy, Mexico and Portugal had below-average growth rates in spite of starting at lower income levels. Among the BRIICS, the most rapid convergence is observed for China, India and Russia, while it has been weakest for Brazil and South Africa. GDP per capita, in constant 2005 purchasing power parities (PPPs). OECD Economic Outlook No. 88 , Panel A). The decomposition reveals several different groups of countries: : the highest income countries (Luxembourg, Norway and the United States in particular) typically have high productivity, although Switzerland stands out as an exception. The decomposition is based on 2009 data. Since then, all countries – and Greece and Iceland even more than others – have been adversely affected by macroeconomic shocks. : Austria, Denmark, Finland, Sweden and the United Kingdom have similar gaps in both labour productivity and labour utilisation that explain their income levels. , Panel B). Despite rapid convergence in some of the BRIICS, all of them still have income gaps of between 60% and 90% to the upper half of OECD countries and continue to face large labour productivity shortfalls, including when compared to the average OECD country. Russia has the highest income in the BRIICS group, and its shortfall is virtually all a labour productivity gap. Among the remaining BIICS, labour productivity shortfalls dominate except for South Africa, where labour resource utilisation is a major challenge, and to a more limited extent, India. In contrast, China has a positive gap in labour utilisation. Relative to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, based on 2009 purchasing power parities (PPPs). The sum of the percentage gap in labour resource utilisation and labour productivity does not add up exactly to the GDP per capita gap since the decomposition is multiplicative. EU brings together countries that are members of both the European Union and the OECD. These are the EU15 countries plus Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. OECD Economic Outlook No. 88 Relative to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, based on revised 2008 purchasing power parities (PPPs) from the World Bank. The OECD average is based on a simple average of the 34 member countries. The sum of the percentage gap in labour resource utilisation and labour productivity does not add up exactly to the GDP per capita gap since the decomposition is multiplicative. e.g.   summarises the five priorities for each country. The remaining two priorities are made using a combination of indicators, where available, and country-specific expertise (see   for a description of the process for identifying policy priorities). Since the set of available performance and policy indicators remains more limited for non-member countries, there is a greater reliance on country expertise for these countries. Compared with the 2009 vintage of , a number of policy priorities for individual countries have been altered. Overall, the share of priorities that have changed is comparable with what happened in the 2009 exercise and the modifications have been more in terms of coverage than in thrust. Specifically, among the pre-enlargement OECD countries, 57 out of 155 policy priorities have been changed compared with the 2009 exercise, with 16 dropped or merged as a result of actions taken or a reconsideration of priorities. The most common shift in priorities was a broadening of their scope, which applied to 31 recommendations in 2011, compared with only rds as many in 2009. Another 10 priorities were either refocused or narrowed, to more specifically target a revised policy challenge. ex post This was the case for instance with the tax 2001 reform in the Netherlands (Brys, 2010). The Swedish 1991 reform was also the object of a major evaluation exercise (Agell provides countries with recommendations about the structural reforms that they should consider implementing. However, the business of actually carrying out reform is complex, and involves a wide range of general political economy and more country-specific considerations. Recent OECD analysis has examined the political economy of reform in 20 country-specific case studies of reform episodes in 10 OECD countries as well as thematic treatments of the conditions that can make actual reform possible (see OECD, 2009a and 2010e). This work builds on earlier OECD work, including a chapter in the 2007 edition of The more successful reforms in the case studies generally took over two years to prepare and adopt – and this does not include the preparation work done in the many reform episodes in which problems and proposals had been debated and studied for years before the authorities set to work framing specific reforms. If the government undertaking a reform initiative is not united around the policy, it will send out mixed messages, and opponents will exploit its divisions; defeat is usually the result. The case studies suggest that cohesion matters more than such factors as the strength or unity of opposition parties or the government’s parliamentary strength. i.e.  The OECD case studies also provide further evidence in support of some of the major findings identified by the OECD’s earlier econometric work, particularly with respect to the facilitating effect of crises and sound public finances. Finally, the case studies cast some doubt on the often-repeated claim that voters tend to punish reforming governments: the likelihood of subsequent re-election was about the same for the more and less successful reform episodes. policy areas for the first three priorities and human capital for the last), partly following up on last year’s edition which featured new empirical research in these domains. Some labour reform recommendations were refocused or removed, as a result of some progress in strengthening activation (see  OECD in 2011 For the BRIICS, four-fifths of the policy recommendations are aimed at improving productivity, reflecting these countries’ relative weakness in this area. There is a strong focus on product market regulation, which is often much more stringent than in OECD countries, and education systems, where quality and achievement levels are relatively low. By contrast, compared to a number of OECD countries, where reducing support is a recommendation, there are no specific priorities on agriculture since support is relatively low. Several additional policy areas are also covered where reforms could boost productivity, including government/governance reform, intellectual property rights protection, and basic financial regulatory liberalisation. These domains are particularly important policy areas for these countries. There are fewer priorities aimed at enhancing labour utilisation, in part because most of the BRIICS have relatively high overall employment rates and less developed tax-benefit systems. Widespread informality is a greater challenge, as it can reduce economy-wide efficiency. A number of recommendations are intended to address this issue, such as relaxing overly strict job protection for permanent e.g.  Bourlès et. al., et. al., et. al., 2011; Bouis and Duval, 2011). Reflecting the importance of this type of reform, recommendations in this area are made in all but five OECD countries (Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States). This is in spite of the fact that considerable reform has been undertaken in this field in recent years. Likewise, all of the new countries in the Within product market regulation, for half of the OECD member countries and all the BRIICS except Brazil, recommendations were made to reduce economy-wide regulatory burdens. These measures include a reduction of barriers to entrepreneurship (Austria, Chile, Czech Republic, France, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal) through a reduction in the cost and legal barriers to entry (Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Israel), the establishment of one-stop shops or simplification of entry procedures (Chile, Italy), and easing of business exit (Chile, Czech Republic, Hungary). A further streamlining of permit and licensing systems is also needed in Estonia, Germany, Iceland, Israel and Portugal. et. al. : While in many OECD countries, reforms of network sectors have advanced considerably – within the EU often following European Commission directives – functional separation of supply and production in the energy sector is still identified as a priority. Beyond energy, further reform and cross-border integration of transport, postal, telecommunications and port services is a priority. Outside of the EU, restructured energy markets are also a priority in Canada, Iceland, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Switzerland and Turkey. : For the EU as a whole, the full implementation of the 2009 Services Directive is a priority, with its provisions still not fully transposed into law in many member states. In retail trade, restrictions on opening hours in Belgium and Luxembourg and limits on the size or operation of larger outlets in France, Ireland, Portugal and Spain still remain an obstacle to competition, and are identified as country‑specific priorities. Professional services suffer from licensing requirements and compulsory chamber memberships that limit competition in a number of EU countries, where reforms are identified as priorities (Austria, Germany, Greece, Luxembourg, Portugal and the Slovak Republic). Beyond the EU, there has been progress in Canada to reduce inter-provincial barriers to labour mobility and competition in the skilled trades, but implementation is still lacking. In a more limited number of OECD countries, reductions of barriers to foreign investment and ownership are identified as priorities. Restrictions in particular sectors are a concern in Canada (especially for telecom and air transport), Iceland (for fisheries and electricity), Japan (for services), Korea (for network sectors and services) and Mexico (services and infrastructure). Australia and New Zealand need to improve transparency of FDI screening procedures, while Estonia relies on a distortionary FDI grant system. Among non-member countries, a reduction of FDI restrictions (especially in services) is identified as a priority in India, Indonesia and Russia, with targeted trade barriers also being a problem in India and Russia – which introduced a particularly large number of discriminatory measures in wake of the financial crisis that have not yet been fully rescinded. Reforms that facilitate the accumulation of human capital are among the most important for enhancing long-run living standards, although it takes a generation for their benefits to be fully realised. One key dimension that is increasingly appreciated in the growth literature is that the quality of education is at least as important as the number of years of schooling (OECD, 2010f). Education recommendations are made for 25 OECD countries, as well as all of the BRIICS countries except Russia. These recommendations can be grouped into several areas: : enhancing access to, and the impact of early education programmes (Australia, Poland and the United Kingdom); improving schools’ infrastructure (Greece, Mexico, South Africa); improving teacher training (Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa, the United States). : strengthening school accountability and autonomy (Greece, Spain, Iceland, India, Mexico, Norway, Turkey, United States); improving curricula and evaluation (Brazil, Chile, Greece, Mexico, Portugal); postponing tracking (Austria, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Switzerland); strengthening vocational education (Hungary, Portugal); and addressing inequalities in access (China, Indonesia, Israel, Slovak Republic). : last year’s volume of examined the extent to which education policies (and tax and benefit systems) may affect social mobility, which can enhance entrepreneurship, the overall quality and allocation of human capital, work incentives and ultimately productivity. The United States is one of several OECD countries that do not do well on this account (Causa and Johansson, 2009), and reforms to improve equality of opportunity are identified as one of the top five priorities. These measures include strengthening early childhood education and enhancing the social mix in classrooms. The costs of some education reforms are a concern at a time when the vast majority of OECD countries are contemplating fiscal consolidation. However, there can be considerable cost efficiencies to be had within many countries’ education systems while maintaining, or even raising, output levels. This issue, and the potential scope for cost savings, is discussed at greater length in the fiscal section below. Very little progress has occurred in reducing agricultural subsidies, especially with the closure of the Doha round of international trade negotiations being delayed so long. Producer support levels have fallen somewhat as a mechanical result of higher world market prices of agricultural commodities, but less so as a result of substantial reforms. Recommendations were renewed in this area for Japan, Iceland, Korea, Norway, Switzerland, the United States as well as the EU, who all need to further reduce the level of producer support and to de-link it from production (especially Japan and Korea) to mitigate its adverse effects on the efficiency of resource allocation. Biofuel subsidies entail high (implicit) carbon prices compared with other greenhouse gas mitigation instruments, and certain first-generation biofuels may in fact be carbon-intensive. Subsidies should therefore be reduced in the EU and the United States, while tariffs on imported ethanol should be removed. Restrictive housing policies such as rent regulation can limit labour mobility, impede the smooth functioning of labour markets and potentially raise structural unemployment, especially in the current recovery context where reallocation of labour across different sectors and regions is needed in a number of OECD countries. A special chapter on this topic is included in this volume (Chapter 4). Overly stringent planning and zoning can raise house price levels and volatility, and thereby contribute to financial and economic instability as well as undermine competition and productivity in certain sectors such as retail trade. Housing policies and rent regulation need to be revised in Denmark, Estonia, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Slovak Republic, Sweden and the United Kingdom. In China, the only partial implementation of rural land management regulations deters permanent migration and thereby reinforces urban-rural distortions that hamper geographic mobility and ultimately overall productivity. : as highlighted in the 2009 edition of Growth (OECD, 2009b), the structure of taxation can lead to distortions in the incentives to save, work and invest, reducing economy-wide productivity and labour input. Policy recommendations to improve the efficiency of the tax system are featured for Australia, Canada, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Korea, Portugal and the United States. These include the reduction of corporate taxes (Australia, Italy and Japan), as well as more general guidance to shift the structure of taxation toward consumption (and immovable property), which can raise GDP per capita. An introduction of an integrated nationwide value-added tax (VAT) system is recommended for Brazil and the United States – where the mortgage interest deduction and (limited) health insurance tax exclusion also still need to be reduced. Policies to reduce tax evasion as well as to broaden the tax base are advocated in several countries (Greece, Hungary, Italy, Korea and Portugal) as a way to reduce distortions while enhancing revenue. : reforms to improve the efficiency of government expenditure are a priority for the Czech Republic, Finland, Hungary, Iceland and New Zealand. Increased use of benchmarking is recommended in Finland, Iceland and New Zealand. : enhancing the capacity of transport systems – primarily roads – is a priority in four member countries, and this requires better selection of infrastructure projects in Australia, more effective user charges in Ireland and the United Kingdom, and a general upgrading in Poland. Better pricing and management of water and sewage treatment are identified as priorities in Australia and Ireland, while telecommunications infrastructure is a priority in Poland. Infrastructure provision levels are still low in many non-member countries, and an increase in investment is recommended in Brazil and India. While raising spending is an important part of this challenge, a reform of the regulatory environment for infrastructure would help to attract private investment and optimise use, notably in Indonesia. The OECD’s Innovation Strategy has highlighted the importance of a broad range of education, regulatory, infrastructure and other policies that can help strengthen innovation systems, potentially enhancing durably productivity growth (OECD, 2010g). Specific recommendations are made to redirect public funding towards those R&amp;D support programmes that have the highest expected returns (Ireland and Canada), increase R&amp;D tax incentives where they are currently low (New Zealand), improve access to venture capital (Slovak Republic) and strengthen collaborations between academia and industry (Ireland). Broader reforms to the science sector could strengthen innovation and absorption in Russia, while better intellectual property rights enforcement would help improve incentives for investments (often involving technology transfers) in new products in China. and last year’s edition of In non-member countries, a number of additional policy areas stand out as particularly relevant, as highlighted in the 2010 special chapter on the BIICS. Beyond the domains already mentioned above – notably product market reform, infrastructure, education, health care, innovation and financial services – some other areas are more important for these countries: e.g.  : energy subsidies are sometimes used as social policy devices but they distort markets and waste resources that could more effectively be targeted directly at the poor – such as through cash transfers – or at growth-promoting spending. Phasing out such subsidies is a priority for India and Indonesia in particular. Beyond the above areas, there may be some policy areas which the exercise does not yet cover which could be of considerable importance for improving living standards in the BRIICS, as discussed in the special chapter in the 2010 edition of et. al. Cross-country differences in the response of average hours worked reflect a number of features including collective bargaining and policy settings. Stricter job protection, more flexible hours averaging rules and in some cases collective bargaining agreements tend to encourage working‑hours adjustment. Many countries, especially in Europe, have also encouraged employment retention by introducing or scaling-up often generous short-time working schemes (see OECD, 2010b, Chapter 5). 2008 for Brazil, Indonesia and South Africa and 2007 for China. OECD Economic Outlook No. 88: Statistics and Projections Database New Zealand United States United Kingdom Based on OECD estimates of how the impact of recessions on structural unemployment is affected by cross-country differences in labour market institutions and policies (see Guichard and Rusticelli, 2010). OECD Economic Outlook No. 87 , Table 5.2. High average and – in particular – marginal taxes on labour incomes can reduce workforce participation and raise unemployment, especially for workers with low incomes. High marginal tax rates have also been found to reduce weekly hours worked of second earners (Causa, 2009). Lowering such taxes (including through cuts in social contributions) is a priority for almost half of OECD countries (Australia, Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Finland, France, Hungary, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Turkey). Restructuring benefit systems is a particular challenge in the post-recession context due to the heightened risk of unemployment persistence and early withdrawal from the labour force. Embedded features of pension systems – such as the eligibility age for benefits, the extent of actuarial adjustments for early and late retirement and the existence of formal or effective early retirement schemes –have powerful effects on decisions to remain in the labour force. Reforms that move pension systems closer to actuarial neutrality are identified as priorities in Austria, Belgium, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Luxembourg, Slovenia, Spain, Poland and Turkey. Phasing-out early retirement schemes is recommended in Belgium, France, Greece, Luxembourg, Poland and Turkey, and effective retirement ages need to be raised more broadly. However, a tightening of some early exit routes from the labour market risks triggering an increase in the use of others, including disability and sickness benefits. While there was some success in limiting new inflows to these schemes prior to and in the wake of recession, persistently high unemployment will add renewed pressure on systems that do not enforce strict health criteria for eligibility and have insufficient monitoring. Better monitoring of eligibility for disability schemes is a priority in Sweden, while more frequent reviews of work capacity are a priority in the Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom. Unemployment benefit systems have been an important device for mitigating the income losses caused by the crisis, and several OECD countries extended coverage, raised the level and/or lengthened the duration of benefits, especially where these were comparatively low. However, too-high or long-lasting unemployment benefits reduce job-search incentives and can raise wages above market-clearing levels, thereby increasing structural unemployment. Unemployment insurance reform is a priority in Belgium, Canada, Finland, the Netherlands and Portugal. In these countries, stricter limits on benefit duration or a reduction in their level over the unemployment spell are recommended. Relatively generous unemployment benefits can also be made more consistent with low unemployment through well-designed active labour market programmes and strong job‑search requirements. This may be particularly important in view of the labour reallocation needed in wake of the crisis. A revision of these activation policies to strengthen their effectiveness is a priority in Estonia, Ireland, Israel and Luxembourg. et. al. Fiscal deficits and government debt are approaching record levels. Fiscal deficits are estimated to have amounted to 8% of GDP in OECD countries in 2010 – more than three-quarters of which is estimated to be structural – and debt-to-GDP ratios will continue to rise across the OECD area, exceeding 100% of GDP on average in 2011 (OECD, 2010c). This rising indebtednesses in OECD countries could jeopardize future income growth, directly through its effects on long-term interest rates and the ability to counteract future crises, and indirectly by making political support for growth-friendly reforms more difficult (Duval, 2008; Tompson and Dang, 2010). Reduction of fiscal deficits is therefore a crucial policy challenge for OECD countries. A stylised extension to 2025 of OECD’s short-term projections (OECD, 2010c, Chapter 4) has been used to assess the extent of consolidation needed to reduce debt-to-GDP ratios by 2025. The scenario assumes that from 2012 onwards there is a gradual and sustained improvement in the underlying primary balance until the debt-to-GDP ratio is reduced to 60% of GDP in each country. An alternative scenario has been simulated where the extent of consolidation needed just to stabilise the debt-to-GDP ratios at current levels is assessed. The extent of total fiscal consolidation needs is much lower in this case: 5¼ per cent GDP for the OECD as a whole against 11½ per cent of GDP when the debt-to-GDP ratio is required to reach 60%. However, a scenario under which debt‑to-GDP ratios are stabilised at current levels rather than reduced would still leave some countries with very high debt levels, of over 100% of GDP over the 2025 horizon (OECD, 2010c). This scenario does not include the effects on public budgets of population aging and continued upward pressures on health spending. In the typical OECD country, preventing or offsetting these spending pressures requires cumulative measures amounting to ¼ per cent of GDP per year over the coming 15 years just to keep the underlying primary deficit unchanged, although it might be slightly less on average for the larger OECD countries (OECD, 2010c). Required improvement in the underlying primary deficit (from 2010 onwards) to achieve a debt-to-GDP ratio equal to 60% of GDP by 2025 The chart shows the total consolidation effort required to achieve a gross general government debt-to-GDP ratio equal to 60% of GDP by 2025. It assumes a constant improvement in the underlying primary balance each year between 2013 and 2025, calculated so as to achieve the debt target in 2025 and based on the improvement projected in each country between 2010-12. The required consolidation effort for Japan to achieve a debt ratio of 60% of GDP is not shown because it would call for a very large degree of tightening if this were to be achieved by 2025. OECD Economic Outlook No. 88, Vol. 2010/2. (more than 6% of GDP relative to 2010): the reduction of the debt-to-GDP ratio would call for an increase in underlying primary balances of more than 10% of GDP in Greece, France, Ireland, Japan, Poland, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the United States. The required change ranges from 6% to 10% of GDP in Iceland, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and the Slovak Republic. (lower than 6% of GDP relative to 2010): the reduction of the debt-to-GDP ratio would require an increase of underlying primary balances of less than 4% of GDP for Belgium, Finland, Hungary and New Zealand. The need for fiscal consolidation ranges from 4% to 6% in Austria, Canada, the Czech Republic and Germany. : a third group of countries has comparatively low fiscal consolidation needs. Within the OECD, countries such as Australia, Denmark, Korea, Luxembourg, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland do not need to implement fiscal consolidation in order to achieve the 60% debt-to-GDP ratio in 2025, due to their more favourable initial conditions. Public finances in the BRIICS and new OECD members are also generally more sustainable than in most OECD countries, reflecting the comparatively low level of their debt-to-GDP ratios, their moderate primary deficits and/or their relatively strong growth prospects. This is especially the case for China and Indonesia where the general government debt is below 30% of GDP and fiscal deficits are small (respectively, 1.2% and 1.6% of GDP in 2009). South Africa and Russia have comparatively higher headline deficits (amounting to respectively 7.6% and 5.3% of GDP) but also enjoy debt-to-GDP ratios below 30%. Given the size of fiscal imbalances and the need to preserve confidence and credibility, many OECD countries appropriately plan to begin a process of consolidation from 2011. Such efforts could be aided by the implementation of structural reforms. Generally, structural measures that raise potential output through higher labour utilisation are likely to contribute more to fiscal consolidation than measures which work through the productivity channel. Higher employment is often associated with higher tax revenue and lower public spending on benefits. Overall, a 1 percentage point improvement in potential employment through structural reforms would improve the fiscal position across OECD countries by between 0.3 to 0.8 points of GDP (OECD, 2010c). Higher productivity is likely to be reflected into higher public sector wages or higher social benefits, et. al. , 2007). e.g.  Ireland, Japan, Poland, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the United States) may be forced to favour policies that are likely to directly improve their fiscal balances over the coming years. Consequently, they may give priority to reforms which boost employment and reduce public spending at the same time. By the same token, these countries have less room to boost public spending on productivity-enhancing areas like education, innovation and infrastructure – which of course does not imply that progress cannot be made in these areas through other means. e.g.  Four of these categories, which are reviewed in detail below, could contribute to both raise long-term living standards and consolidate public budgets. These are reforms that would enhance fiscal positions either directly, by reducing public spending, or indirectly, by gradually increasing tax receipts through higher productivity and – especially – employment. Reforms that ultimately increase productivity and/or employment, but would first weaken fiscal positions by increasing growth-friendly public spending ( e.g.  e.g.  de facto inter alia tighter eligibility criteria to disability benefits, cuts in the level and/or duration of unemployment benefits or increases in minimum retirement ages. Such reforms are identified as key priorities in almost three-quarters of the 40 countries considered in Only China, Czech Republic, Germany, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Slovak Republic, Spain, Russia and the United States do not have country-specific priorities in this area. The crisis has already led to an increase in labour force participation in a number of countries, which reforms in these areas could help consolidate. Phasing out crisis-related increases in benefit levels and/or duration (where these were already high) as unemployment goes down would also raise labour utilisation with direct co-benefits for public budgets. By contrast, some of the recent extensions in the coverage of unemployment benefits in countries where systems did not previously cover an important share of the workforce, – particularly temporary workers – could be made permanent. Implement taxes on negative externalities such as pollution (e.g. carbon emission pricing, green taxes) The indicators used in this section have not been used for the purpose of setting countries’ priorities because there are currently no plans to update them on a regular basis, which would be necessary for their regular use in the et. al. The estimated potential cost savings with no prejudice to education outcomes amount to 0.2% to 0.4% of GDP for most countries, even reaching 0.6% to 1.3% of GDP for Denmark, Germany, Luxembourg, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States ( inter alia the possibility for pupils and/or their families to choose between schools (therefore making schools more responsive to needs), a definition of performance objectives for public educational institutions along with incentives to reach them, and a decentralisation of responsibilities for primary and secondary education to sub-central governments (OECD, 2008, Chapter 4). Potential savings represent the difference between a no-reform scenario and a scenario where all schools in each country would become on average as efficient as those in the best performing country. Estimates of efficiency are based on DEA analysis at the national level with two outputs (average Programme for International Student Assessment – PISA score and homogeneity of PISA score) and two inputs (teachers per 100 students and socio-economic background of students). Potential input cuts applied to compensation of all staff in primary, secondary and post-secondary non-tertiary education in 2002. Education at a Glance, OECD indicators 2005 Improving health care sector efficiency could deliver even larger fiscal gains, and it appears as a key priority for the Czech Republic, Russia, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. More generally across OECD countries, efficiency gains hold the promise of sizeable cost savings given that overall health care spending accounts for about 9% of GDP on average (6% when considering only public spending). Potential savings are estimated here as the reduction in public spending that could be achieved by moving towards the efficiency levels of best-performing countries while improving health outcomes – as measured by life expectancy gains – at a similar pace as over the past decade.  are not strictly comparable across countries as they depend on the projected gains in life expectancy, which are country-specific as they are assumed to reflect a continuation of past trends. For more details, see Chapter 6 on the efficiency of health care systems across the OECD. Such savings in public expenditure could amount on average to about 2% of GDP, and they appear particularly sizeable for Greece, Ireland and the United Kingdom ( such as pollution could also enhance welfare – although not GDP per capita – while assisting fiscal consolidation. Pollution pricing mechanisms such as green taxes or auctioning of emission permits should generally be preferred to green subsidies, as the latter increase budget deficits and are not cost-effective tools to address environmental issues more broadly. Revenues from environmental taxes vary widely across countries ( ). They remain low in countries such as Canada, Chile, New Zealand or the United States, implying some apparent scope for raising further revenues from this source. In particular, the potential fiscal revenues from pricing greenhouse gas emissions is sizeable, and has been evaluated for instance at 2.5% of GDP on average by 2020, if all industrialised countries were to use domestic carbon taxes or auctioned emission trading permits to reduce emissions in each of them by 20% relative to 1990 levels (De Serres et. al. , 2010). In the EU, the planned gradual auctioning of emission permits is expected to raise a growing amount of revenues from 2013. Opportunities to raise additional receipts emerge also from the existence of disparities in environmental-related tax rates within countries (OECD, 2009c). Such disparities reduce the efficiency of green taxation as they do not generally reflect differences in the magnitude of negative externalities.  a scenario where public spending and life expectancy gains would increase at the same pace over the next decade as over the decade 1997-2007 and ii)  See Chapter 4; OECD estimates based on Joumard et. al. , No 627. Reducing producer support to agriculture is identified as a country-specific priority in the EU, Iceland, Japan, Korea, Norway, Switzerland and the United States; reducing subsidies to energy appears as a recommendation in Indonesia, and phasing out housing subsidies (or tax expenditures in this area) is a priority in Denmark and Luxembourg. While difficult to quantify, tax expenditures have probably increased over time, notably in order to address market failures or income redistribution concerns, and may now be very large, possibly reaching close to 20% of total tax revenues in Italy and the United States and 30% in the United Kingdom (OECD, 2009c). When an alternative cost-efficient way to reach the same objective exists, removing them is recommended as they need to be offset by other taxes and thereby generally increase distortions in the tax system (OECD, 2010h). Tax expenditures also make tax compliance more difficult. Improving the effectiveness of tax administrations in tax collection and the fight against tax evasion is another way to both enhance tax efficiency and reduce fiscal deficits, and the amounts of tax revenues involved can be significant. Product market reforms are mostly fiscally-neutral in the short term and are likely to contribute to a reduction of fiscal deficits in the medium term by increasing productivity – as well as employment – and therefore tax revenues. This productivity effect could be particularly important for lower-income OECD members and the BRIICS, where the stringency of regulations in product markets and thus the scope for productivity gains are particularly high, but fiscal deficits are low in most of them. et al. , 2010). They are actually recommended in all but five of the 40 countries covered: Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. Even if revenue neutral, tax reforms can also make some indirect contribution to fiscal consolidation through their medium term effects on income, productivity and tax receipts. For most OECD countries, recent empirical evidence points to significant impacts on productivity and investment from changes in tax structure involving lower personal and corporate income taxes offset by higher consumption and property taxes, as well as from tax-base broadening accompanied by lower marginal tax rates (see Arnold and Schwellnus, 2008; Johansson et. al. , 2008; OECD, 2010h). Among the sixteen countries with a recommendation in this area, there is more room for changes in countries where these indirect taxes are not predominant such as in Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway, Sweden and the United States ( ). In several countries, broadening tax bases would further enhance the efficiency of the tax system by enabling a reduction in tax rates and by cutting economic distortions and administrative compliance costs associated to tax expenditures. This has been identified as a key priority in Austria, Belgium, Greece, Italy, Korea, Portugal and the United States. 2007 for Australia, Belgium, Mexico, the Netherlands and Poland. Higher flexibility in wage bargaining, a reduction in minimum labour costs or job protection reform to address labour market dualism could help to enhance the job opportunities of specific underemployed groups of the labour force such as young people and the low-skilled. Insofar as overall employment increases, such reforms would indirectly contribute to fiscal consolidation, as higher employment implies more taxes and less spending over the medium run. Labour tax wedge cuts offset by increases in other taxes could have the same effect. The need for such labour market reforms has been diagnosed as a priority in 19 countries, while tax reforms involving labour tax cuts have been recommended in 16 countries. sums up the potential co-benefits for fiscal positions from addressing the revised priorities. It reports the number of reform priorities that would directly and quickly improve the fiscal balance, and also provides for most OECD countries the potential cost savings that could be reaped by moving national education and health care systems to best practice. It turns out that many of the revised priorities could, if addressed, make a significant contribution to fiscal consolidation in most OECD countries. Education and health reforms would further strengthen those fiscal gains. ) despite some shrinking during the crisis. Addressing these imbalances can enhance global financial stability, and as such it has been one of the main focuses of the G20 framework for strong, sustainable and balanced growth launched by G20 leaders at the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009. Even if it is not their main objective, structural policies may affect current account positions through their effect on the saving and investment decisions of households, firms and governments. New Zealand United Kingdom United States – OECD Economic Outlook No. 88: Statistics and Projections Database Fiscal consolidation programmes implemented in most OECD countries – the magnitude of which tends to be larger on average in external deficit countries, possibly aided by the type of structural reforms discussed in the previous section, may contribute to narrowing the gap for deficit economies by increasing their overall saving rates. More generally, beside their impacts on the fiscal deficit, growth-friendly structural reforms may be considered in light of their direct effects on saving and investment behaviour. Results from new OECD empirical analysis (see Chapter 5 in this edition) help identify the side effects of structural policies on current accounts ( The empirical analysis in Chapter 5 suggests that, over and above its indirect effect through higher productivity growth, removing anti-competitive regulations in product markets could directly boost private investment, and thereby further reduce the current account position of surplus countries. Current account adjustment to productivity shocks also depends on whether these occur in the tradable or non-tradable sectors, with a larger deterioration to be expected in the former case (Dornbusch, 1983). For instance, aligning the level of product market regulation in Japan and Germany – where reform is identified as a priority in this area – with OECD best practice could raise private investment in these countries by 0.6 and 0.7 percentage points of GDP in the short term, respectively. – – – – – – – 0/– 0/– Based on the OECD estimates featured in the special chapter (Chapter 5) on this topic. The reported results refer to the medium- to long-run effect in all cases but PMR reform, where the short-run effect is shown. The identification of surplus and deficit countries is based on 2009 data. According to recent OECD estimates, financed increases in social spending on health by 1 percentage point of GDP in OECD countries could on average reduce private saving by about 1.5% of GDP. The effect may be even higher for countries with low initial levels of social spending, possibly reaching 2½ per cent of GDP for China for instance, although there is wide uncertainty around this estimate. In the case of China, insofar as sustained increases in social spending remained unfinanced, they would prevent the expiry of recent fiscal stimulus from leading to a rise in public saving and the current account could weaken further. Reforms that aim to improve the sustainability of public pension schemes in industrialised economies by delaying the standard retirement age may help to reduce life-cycle saving in surplus countries: OECD estimates suggest that an increase in the statutory retirement age by one year could reduce total and private saving by around ½ percentage point of GDP in the medium to long run. Financial market liberalisation, especially in emerging countries where it often implies curbing financial repression, should help to relax borrowing constraints for households and firms. Indeed, some estimates reported in the special chapter (Chapter 5) suggest that such reforms could reduce saving especially in less advanced economies. Investment may also rise, further weakening the current account. Regarding external imbalances, this analysis is largely consistent with results from the first stage of the G20 Mutual Assessment Process that were put forward by the IMF with OECD input presented at the June G20 meeting in Toronto (IMF, 2010b). For the selection of the three indicator-based policy priorities, the starting point is a detailed examination of labour utilisation and productivity performance so as to uncover specific areas of relative strength and weakness. Each performance indicator is juxtaposed with corresponding policy indicators, where OECD empirical research has shown a robust link to performance, to determine where performance and policy weaknesses appear to be linked. This evaluation process is carried out for each of the approximately 50 areas where OECD policy indicators provide coverage. below shows, for a sample country, a scatter plot of pairings of policy indicators (on the horizontal axis) with corresponding performance indicators (on the vertical axis). Since many of the approximately 50 indicators are associated with more than one performance area, there are potentially more than 100 potential pairings to be examined. The indicators of policy and performance are standardised by re-scaling them so that each has a mean of zero and a cross-county standard deviation of one, with positive numbers representing positions more growth-friendly than the OECD average. The scatter plot is thus divided into four quadrants, depending on whether a country’s policy-performance pairing is below or above the average policy or performance score. below average. In most countries there are more than three unique policy areas that qualify as potential priorities (for instance, Germany had 16 candidates in the 2009 exercise). When there are more than three candidate policy priorities, the list has been narrowed using a combination of country expertise with the following criteria: ) the estimated quantitative impact of reforms in the policy area on GDP per capita as determined in previous OECD analysis, ) the normalised distance of the policy stance from the benchmark (the OECD average), and ) recent trends in policy and performance. The limit on the number of priorities means that for some countries, obvious policy imperatives may not be identified as priorities because other priorities are deemed as more important. et. al. , No. 843. OECD (2003),  OECD (2006),  OECD Employment Outlook 2006: Boosting Jobs and Incomes New Zealand Remove barriers to competition in network industries by strengthening the regulator’s powers, removing legal barriers to access the telecommunication sector and privatising the postal services provider. United Kingdom United States Improve primary and secondary education by improving teacher training and strengthening schools’ accountability for student progress. Traditional national income accounting has generally followed the principle that households are final consumers – rather than producers – of goods and services. Consequentially, goods and services produced by households for the market are included in economic aggregates such as GDP, as are goods produced for own-consumption, such as agricultural products and own-account construction, but non-market services produced by households, with the notable exception of dwelling services, are not. This has the problematic implication that when services are sourced from the market rather than produced at home, national income rises, even if the volume and/or quality of actual production and consumption does not increase. For international comparisons purposes, this could be especially problematic for comparisons of countries at earlier stages of development, where markets for certain types of food, cleaning and childcare services are less developed. Satellite accounts have been constructed in a number of OECD countries to help to address this problem (including for Australia, Canada, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Mexico and the United Kingdom). A recent study of the United States, for example, showed that extending the production boundary to include household production of non-market services not already included in GDP would increase US GDP by 19% using the replacement cost approach (with production valued at housekeepers’ hourly wages), and 62% using the opportunity cost (using average hourly wages) approach. et al Interestingly however, average annual real growth over the period 1985-2004 differed by only 0.1% percentage point between the two approaches, indicating that non-market services (as a share of total output) do not vary significantly over time. In terms of income gaps, the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress set up by French President Sarkozy found that broadening measures of material well-being to incorporate household production would reduce the income gap between France and the United States by about 5 percentage points (Stiglitz-Sen-Fitoussi, 2009). This annex explores measures that extend GDP measurement to non-market production using recently available time-use surveys, and thereby may come closer to true measures of material well-being. Overall, these measures present a picture of national income that is quite different from the traditional one, on average 45% higher than standard measures of GDP per capita. However, they are also surrounded by a considerable degree of uncertainty, with different choices of methodology leading to 25% or 66% higher average GDP per capita, depending on whether the replacement cost or opportunity cost method is used. Nevertheless, the ranking of countries in terms of income is not substantially affected by the incorporation of household production, whichever price basis is used, although the income gap between the five lower income OECD countries in the sample and the sample average is reduced substantially (by about 20 percentage points). Yet the ranking can change more substantially for labour productivity levels once non-market production and the associated inputs (in terms of hours worked) are accounted for, with several countries changing their position in the distribution rather dramatically. The starting point for this work is a new database of time-use surveys collected by the OECD (Miranda, 2011). This database collates time-use surveys conducted by national statistics institutes for 2008 using a classification of activities based on five primary categories defined by the OECD: paid work or study (work-related activities); unpaid work (household activities); personal care; leisure; ) summarises the information available from time-use surveys for 26 OECD countries. It shows that in most OECD countries the average time per person spent on unpaid household work falls between three and four hours per day, with the notable exceptions of Korea, where the average is just over two hours per day, and Mexico, where the average is close to five hours per day. Includes people aged 15 and older. Austria and Denmark are set at the European Union average. When households produce own-account services, they use labour input (household members’ time) and capital (consumer durables). Two approaches are used to estimate the value of the labour supplied in producing these services (see  approach; where an average post-tax, hourly wage, representative of the broad range of activities covered in the production of household production of non-market services, is constructed using data collected in the OECD-Eurostat PPP programme. The second, to provide some measure of the potential range of estimates (in practice an upper bound), is the approach, which takes the average post-tax hourly wage across the whole economy (see OECD, 2010). Conceptual arguments can be made that favour both the opportunity and replacement cost approach, although the latter seems generally more in line with national accounts concepts. In practice, most studies that have produced estimates of household production have based these estimates on replacement costs, following the underlying valuation principle that the ultimate goal is to obtain the equivalent market value of the non-market services produced. In other words, it is the price that would be paid for somebody else to produce the same quality of service. Another advantage of the replacement cost approach over the opportunity cost approach is that the latter necessarily assumes that any person considered, including those outside the labour force such as full-time housewives or retirees would be able to find a job in the market according to his or her qualifications, which is a very strong assumption. One could even go as far as setting the opportunity cost equal to zero (see Abraham and Mackie, 2007) in the extreme case where the individual’s competences have no value on the labour market. However, estimates based on the opportunity cost approach are not meaningless. At the very least they provide in practice an upper bound on estimates of household production. Therefore they are also shown in this analysis. et. al. The estimates of hourly wages for both the replacement and opportunity cost approach are based on the assumption that the market price would reflect the prices paid for informal, unregistered labour, and so are net-of taxes and social security contributions. Not all studies have estimated labour costs on this basis, And some have for example used gross measures. For the replacement cost approach, when direct estimates of the hourly wages of unregistered workers are not available, estimates of hourly post-tax wage costs are based on hourly wage costs of registered workers adjusted for taxes and social security contributions using data from is computed as the average tax and social security contributions paid by employees (as a per cent of total wages) across two situations, namely for a single person with no children earning two-thirds of the national average annual salary and for a single person with two children earning two-thirds of the national average annual salary. Similarly, for the opportunity cost approach the average tax wedge is calculated as the average for a single person earning 100% of the national annual average salary and a sole earner married with two children earning 100% of the national annual average salary. It is important to note in this context that estimates of Population, 16 years-of-age and over For the purpose of cross-country comparisons, the preference and focus of this annex is to present results in volume terms – in other words by converting the nominal values into 2008 US dollars using purchasing power parities, and comparing country estimates on the basis of both the replacement and opportunity costs. Beyond labour inputs, capital services are another basic input in the production of household non-market services, and may also substitute for labour. Clearly innovations and inventions such as the dishwasher, washing machine, and microwave have provided possibilities for substituting capital for labour. Including the contribution of consumer durables is important therefore to fully reflect the consumption of goods and services by households in a consistent way across countries and over time. Consumer durables used in this analysis are based on the Eurostat-OECD (2007) classification of final expenditure by GDP category, which includes household appliances, motor vehicles and also categories of consumer durables, such as furniture, that provide capital services related to dwelling services – but dwelling services themselves are not included in this study. It is important to note that these estimates will be biased upwards since some consumer durables, such as cars, also provide capital services to commuting and leisure activities. (1-δ) + I is the flow of purchases of consumer durables during period t in constant (chained) prices, δ is the geometric rate of depreciation, set at 20%. Note that no distinction is made between different types of consumer durables in this analysis. The value of capital services is measured as the price of capital services per unit of the net stock multiplied by the net stock (see Jorgenson and Griliches, 1967). The capital service price contains three elements: return on capital, depreciation, and revaluation of capital goods. A simplified version of the capital service price for consumer durables is estimated as: [r+δ] = [r+δ]P Beyond the Market: Designing Non-market Accounts for the United States , Vol. 55, No. 2; OECD (2010),  Taxing Wages 2009; OECD/Statistical Office of the European Communities, Luxembourg (2007),  , Vol. 34, No. 3. shows the results of the two methods of estimating household production of non-market services. These estimates apply both the labour cost and the capital services estimates described in . Using the replacement cost method, the augmentation of GDP per capita ranges from 10% for Norway to 50% for Mexico, averaging 25% across the OECD sample. With the opportunity cost method, the augmentation is even larger: 32% in the case of Norway and 121% for Mexico, and 66% on average. The rankings stay qualitatively similar, though some countries certainly improve in their position – for instance, Germany and Portugal each jump forward in the distribution ( ). More substantively, the distribution is compressed, with the five lowest income countries’ GDP per capita augmented by well more than average: with the replacement cost method, these countries’ income rises by 38% compared with 25% on average; with the opportunity cost method, they increase by 93% 66%. Although the large margin of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates using the two methods suggests caution in using these augmented figures in practice, volume-based (real) international of incomes are much less affected by the choice of methods – as evident in the fairly stable ranking of countries across both methods. In principle, cross-country comparisons of productivity levels could be more affected than comparisons of GDP per capita levels, at least through a composition effect – i.e.  other economic activities also varies across countries – and further OECD work will be carried out on this issue. However, whether any changes in cross-country rankings of productivity levels would have implications for Incorporating Household Production into International Comparisons of Material Well‑Being , Vol. 55, No. 2. , No. 116. In 2010, the government raised to AUD 231 million the threshold above which FDI needs to be screened before implementation. The higher threshold used for US investors (about 1 billion AUD) should also apply to other investors, and the benefit of investment liberalisation provided for by Australia in recent FTAs should be extended to other countries. Transparency would be enhanced by more information on the criteria applied in government decisions and by involving specialist agencies (  national securities) in the review process of FDI approval. Lowering further corporate and personal income taxes and raise the goods and services tax. Simplify and rationalise the states’ tax system, especially on housing. A new employment service system was introduced in 2009. The government also announced measures to improve the work capacity assessment of people on disability benefits. The authorities committed to provide universal access to ECEC for 15 hours per week for four year-olds, improve delivery through the National Quality Agenda and provide additional funding for indigenous children. –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 –0.2 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Enrolment rates of children aged 4 and under as a percentage of the population aged 3 to 4. Average of European countries in the OECD. EU and OECD averages exclude Estonia in 2006 and 2009, Israel and Slovenia in 2006. No. 88 Chart C: OECD, Austria’s GDP per capita is below the average of the upper half of OECD countries but its relative position has slightly improved since the mid-2000s, reflecting rising labour productivity before the 2009 recession. In 2009, progress has been made to strengthen early education (kindergarten) and alleviate premature streaming of pupils in secondary schools. However, weaknesses remain and there is need for reform in the following areas Early tracking of students at age 10 undermines the performance of the school system and particularly penalises immigrant students. The share of young people graduating from academic tertiary education programmes is low, holding back productivity growth and innovation. The University Act was amended in 2009, involving changes in the appointment of members of university councils, introduction of probationary phases for students and possibility of setting access criteria for graduate school studies. This followed the implementation of a three-year performance budgeting system in 2007. However, the abolition of already low tuition fees for most universities in 2008 was a backtracking in reforms. No action taken since 2009. The 2003-04 pension reforms considerably reduced early retirement incentives. However, some backtracking resulted from the subsequent halving of the discount rate for early retirement in 2007 and the extension of the special early retirement scheme in 2008. Phase in all provisions of the 2003-04 pension reforms without relaxing their conditions. Tighten eligibility criteria to ensure that disability pensions are only used in well-justified cases. Market supervision in the gas and electricity sectors was somewhat strengthened before 2009. New access obligations were set for telecommunication network operators identified as possessing significant market power in the market studies completed in 2010. Personal income taxes were lowered somewhat in 2009, including through tax relief for families with children, entrepreneurs and freelancers. Unemployment insurance contribution rates were reduced for low-wage workers in 2008. No action taken since 2009. The Crafts, Trade, Service and Industry Act was amended in 2008 to facilitate entry in several professions. Several EU directives concerning professional qualification certificates were transposed before 2009. –0.2 –0.1 –0.2 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Implicit tax on continued work in early retirement route, for 55 and 60-year-olds. No. 88 ; Chart C: Duval, R. (2003), , No. 370 and OECD calculations; Chart D: OECD, In 2009, the legal retirement age for women was equalised with that for men at 65. Some previously agreed restrictions on early retirement were implemented. The Trade Practices Act of April 2010 lifted or liberalised a number of Belgian-specific restrictions on sales in the retail sector. The government lowered employers’ social security contributions and introduced wage subsidies to promote employment prospects for low-skilled, younger, older, R&amp;D and shift-and-night workers as well as for long-term unemployed. In 2010, social security contribution cuts were refocused towards low wage workers. No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Implicit tax on continued work in early retirement route, for 55 and 60-year-olds. No. 88 , No. 370 and OECD calculations; Chart C: OECD, In March 2010, the government announced a five-year investment plan with the aim of increasing private and public investment in transport, sanitation, energy and housing. Brazil’s indirect tax system is cumbersome due to its fragmentation, complexity and changing provisions. Onerous social security contributions and additional levies on enterprise payroll imply a large burden on labour income with adverse effects on employment, especially on formal jobs. A reform package was introduced into Congress in 2008 to unify state-level VAT rates and bases and alleviate the burden on labour income. The tax burden on investment has been lowered. A new law entered into force in 2009 to enlarge and reinforce institutional efforts to simplify the tax and regulation systems for self-employed and micro and small companies. . . . . . . . . . . . . –0.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). There has been little progress in integrating regional/provincial electricity markets and opening them up to competition, and no progress in liberalising postal services. In 2009, Canadian governments revised the Labour Mobility Chapter of the Agreement on Internal Trade. Move towards more integrated and competitive electricity markets. Eliminate Canada Post’s legally protected monopoly. Take steps to apply the renegotiated Labour Mobility Chapter as broadly as possible, and review aspects of the regulation of professions and skilled trades that still hinder interprovincial mobility and competition. An agreement to provide airlines unlimited freedom to operate direct services between any point in Canada and the 27 European Union countries was signed in December 2009. In 2010 the existing restrictions on foreign ownership of Canadian satellites were removed. The federal corporate income tax rate began decreasing in 2008 and further reductions are planned at the federal level and in various provinces through July 2013. Provincial capital taxes are being eliminated. Provincial retail sales taxes have been harmonised with the federal GST (value-added tax) in Ontario and British Columbia. In 2010 the federal government stepped up funding for a number of programmes that support business innovation and commercialisation, removed impediments to international venture capital and announced a comprehensive review of all federal support for R&amp;D to improve its contribution to innovation and economic opportunities for business. –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 –0.1 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of European countries in the OECD. EU and OECD averages exclude Estonia in 2006 and 2009, Israel and Slovenia in 2006. No. 88 OECD’s FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index: Revision and Extension to More Economies , No. 525; Chart D: OECD, A law reducing red tape for small and medium-size enterprises passed Congress in early 2010. A bill reducing the administrative burden for start-ups was submitted to Congress in June 2010. A commission is developing proposals to reform bankruptcy procedures for small businesses. An increased voucher subsidy for poor children was introduced and selection of pupils based on ability or socio-economic background was forbidden in primary school in 2008. Accreditation for initial teacher education is now mandatory and the government is developing standards for it. Government funding for scholarships has increased by nearly 70% over 2007-09. Upgrade the subject-content knowledge of teachers through richer curricula and rigorous quality assurance in initial teacher education and extended on-the-job programmes. Implement the envisaged quality assurance system for primary and secondary schools. Hold schools accountable for their pupils’ progress. The government increased public nursery places nearly fourfold and kindergarten places for 2-3 year-olds by 50% over 2006-10. The competition law was reformed in 2009. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 PISA 2009 Database ; Chart C: OECD, The government issued 36 guidelines for supporting and guiding non-public economic development in April 2010, which encouraged private investment in railways, power, telecommunications and rural banks. State-controlled companies are expected to withdraw from some competitive sectors and concentrate on sectors regarded as key, such as coal, petroleum and metals. Public spending on education rose from 2.7% to 3.5% of GDP between 2004 and 2008 and may reach 4% in 2012. In April 2010, the government introduced a new long-term strategy designed to improve schooling for students under 6 and over 15. The quality of teacher training will be improved and entrance methods for higher education changed to reduce the weight of memory-based tests. Comprehensive health insurance and social assistance systems have been introduced in the countryside in 2009, while a new pension scheme is now being rolled out. Pilot studies are underway to reform the length of land use rights and household registration laws, potentially increasing labour mobility. Social expenditure should be further increased to provide broader coverage and a stronger social safety net. Provisions of the 2003 Land Management Law need to be fully implemented to give all farmers full documentation for their rights, thus widening the rental market. The length of the use rights should be extended and household registration laws revised. In June 2008, a new IPR strategy was introduced and has resulted in a new Patent Law and a draft revision to the Trademarks Law. Judicial hearings for IPR violation cases are to be concentrated in selected courts. Enforcement has begun to be stepped up. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). A new labour code came into force in 2007, bringing some aspects of flexibility such as short-time working schemes that were widely used during the recent downturn. Education outcomes for 15 year-olds, as assessed by PISA scores, have worsened. Also, streaming of pupils in secondary schools happens from age 11, hampering social mobility and human capital accumulation. Despite considerable progress, tertiary education graduation rates remain slightly below the OECD average. A blueprint for reform of tertiary education was published in 2009, calling for fees with income contingent loan arrangements as well as changes to the governance of universities, but no action has been taken yet. No action taken on early streaming in secondary education. A new bankruptcy law and administrative one-stop shops for registering a business have been implemented together with simplified and standardised registration forms from 2006. Also, notification of sole proprietors has been largely streamlined. A blueprint for reform has been presented but apart from health care fees introduced in 2008, no systemic action taken. Incentives to encourage efficiency gains in provision of local government services have not been enhanced. –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 –0.4 –0.4 –0.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 From 2009, the grade point average is raised for students who apply for university within the two years after completion of upper secondary school, making their access to tertiary education easier. In 2009 the Parliament adopted new rules for sickness/leave that put emphasis on rehabilitation. In 2009, the Parliament adopted a tax reform lowering the top marginal income tax rate. Income tax thresholds have also been raised even though the government finally decided in May 2010 to limit these increases through 2013 as part of its fiscal consolidation plan. In 2010, the Parliament adopted legislation that broadens the set of mergers subject to scrutiny by the authorities, strengthens the sanctions for violation of procurement rules and liberalises the market for books. Regulations of opening hours in the retail sector have been eased since July 2010. No significant action has been taken in publicly-funded services. The 200 tax reform will reduce the value of the mortgage interest rate deduction from income taxation starting from 2012. No action has been taken on rent regulation. –0.2 –0.3 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). PISA 2009 Database Barriers to foreign ownership have been reduced, but still exceed EU-21 levels and hamper FDI flows, technological spillovers and productivity growth in the tradable sector. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 The 2006 Services Directive should bring a marked improvement in competition. Transposition of the Directive is well advanced but remains incomplete across EU countries. A Single European Payments Area is being created. Postal services will be fully liberalised in 2012. CAP reforms have significantly reduced linkages between payments and production. Milk quotas are to be phased out by 2015. The use of price support has been scaled back for many agricultural commodities. However, the re-introduction of agricultural export subsidies for dairy produce in 2009 was a step back. The European Economic Recovery Plan targeted European Social Fund Support spending on labour market programmes. The Europe 2020 Agenda sets the objective of an employment rate of 75% for those aged 20-64. –0.3 –0.4 –0.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 the upper half of OECD countries narrowed until 2008 but widened again during the recession. This gap mainly reflects lower labour productivity, but labour resource utilisation is also below the best performing countries. Recent reforms have sought to strengthen labour force participation, stem the increase in long-term unemployment and improve the efficiency of public service provision. Additional reforms are still needed in the following areas. The government and stakeholder organisations agreed in 2009 to gradually (until 2025) increase the average effective retirement age by three years. Implement measures to ensure reaching the 2025 target by raising the minimum statutory retirement age, reviewing the disability pension system and fully closing the unemployment pathway into retirement. Strengthen work incentives for older workers by increasing pension accrual rates after 65 and extending the actuarial adjustment of pensions to the full working life, including the period after the minimum retirement age. Measures to fight the recession during the economic crisis have weakened work incentives. Various benefits (maternity, parental and sickness allowance) have been increased and an unemployment benefit supplement for laid-off workers was introduced in July 2009. Average taxes on earnings have been lowered across income classes. The revenue loss is being offset by an increase in most VAT rates by one percentage point, with the exception of VAT on food which has been lowered by 10 percentage points. Municipalities’ productivity is declining which weighs on public finances. –0.1 –0.3 –0.3 –0.3 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Implicit tax on continued work in early retirement route, for 55 and 60-year-olds. No. 88 ; Chart C: Duval, R. (2003), , No. 370 and OECD calculations; Chart D: OECD, Apart from the development of combined work-study schemes through tax incentives and subsidies, no action taken since 2009. Mutually agreed separation has been possible since 2008. Given the difficulty to promote a single, more flexible labour contract, address labour market dualism by broadening the definition of economic redundancy, simplifying layoff procedures and reducing firms’ redeployment obligations. Moreover, target the work-study schemes more on the less skilled, and evaluate their efficiency regularly. A commission of experts was created in 2009 to provide annual advice on minimum wage increases to both social partners and the government. Consistent with its recommendations, the rise in the minimum wage has been limited to the minimum legal requirement. Significant progress has been made recently, but additional actions are needed to promote seniors’ employment. The 2010 reform of the pension system includes an increase of 2 years in the legal retirement age and will increase participation. Companies have been induced to conclude agreements to promote seniors’ employment, which might change both employers’ and workers’ attitudes towards working and training at older ages. i)  grandes écoles A fourth mobile telecommunications operator license was granted in late 2009, and contractual restrictions for mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs) were eased. –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 –0.4 –0.6 –0.2 .  Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Overall EPL is computed as a weighted sum of sub-indicators for regular contracts, temporary contracts and collective dismissals. Year 2009 for France. Implicit tax on continued work in early retirement route, for 55 and 60-year-olds. Year 2010 for France. No. 88 ; Chart C: OECD, , No. 370 and OECD calculations. The GDP per capita gap relative to the upper half of OECD countries has narrowed somewhat since the mid-2000s, but a labour utilisation gap remains. Reforms of the short-time work scheme during the crisis have prevented excessive layoffs. Work incentives are also being strengthened in 2011 by phasing out the temporary supplementary benefit paid to certain long-term unemployed. However, further structural reforms are still needed in the following areas. The statutory fee schedule for architects has been adjusted and simplified in 2009. Länder ) in 2009. Unemployment insurance contributions were temporarily lowered between 2009 and the beginning of 2011 as a fiscal stimulus measure. Health insurance contributions were also reduced in 2009, but will be increased again in 2011. The government is continuing plans to sharply increase the number of childcare places until 2013. –0.2 –0.4 –0.5 –0.6 –0.3 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 ; Chart C: OECD, A recent bill raises the statutory retirement age, raises the penalties for those retiring before 65, and reduces the generosity of pension benefits. The revised list of professions under arduous occupations will be fully implemented from July 2011. Access to minimum pensions has been limited to persons having reached the statutory retirement age. Actuarial studies are being conducted to assess the impact of pension reform. A 2010 bill introduces sub-minimum wages to assist those aged 25 or younger to find a job, subsidising their social security contributions. It reduces dismissal costs for larger firms and it provides more flexible rules governing the settlement of severance payments. No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 , No. 370 and OECD calculations; Chart C: OECD, The statutory retirement age will be gradually increased to 65 years from 2012. Eligibility conditions for early retirement programmes and disability benefits have been tightened. In 2009, employer social contributions were cut substantially. Income taxes were lowered in 2009 and 2010. A flat personal income tax rate at 16% and tax credits for families with children will be implemented in 2011. Early tracking and teachers’ inadequate lifelong training undermine the performance of secondary education. Vocational training is not well attuned to the labour market. Higher education financing is inefficient. Raise Roma’s participation in pre-school education, delay the age at which early tracking takes place and enhance teacher training. Strengthen vocational education by making it more relevant for the labour market. Introduce university tuition charges, continue to develop the current income-contingent loan system, and make the subsidy to under-performing tertiary institutions conditional on rapid improvement. –0.2 –0.2 –0.2 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart C: OECD (2010), The 2009 secondary education reforms will enable students to complete upper-secondary education more quickly and provide incentives for new and shorter study programmes to counter high dropout rates. Reduce foreign ownership restrictions in the electricity and fisheries sectors. Divest the National Power Company’s generation activities, which benefit from a cost-of-capital advantage conferred by government ownership, to create a competitive market in electricity generation. –0.1 –0.1 –0.3 –0.3 –0.3 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 ; Chart C: OECD, OECD’s FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index: Revision and Extension to More Economies , No. 525. The 2009 Right to Free Education Act stipulates that every child aged between 6 and 14 years has the right to free and compulsory education. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). OECD’s FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index: Revision and Extension to More Economies , No. 525, OECD, Product Market Regulation Database and Woelf, A. The Ministry of Education launched a 2005-09 strategy aimed at improving the governance, access to, and quality of education. Make income transfer programmes conditional on children attending secondary school and finance the secondary school enrolment fee for disadvantaged children in order to boost enrolment rates. To improve teaching quality, regularly assess teachers’ pedagogical skills. A 2009 electricity law paves the way to increased private participation in generation, distribution and transmission. The government has announced it would finance only 36% of a USD 157 billion investment plan from 2010 to 2014, with the private sector expected to fill the financing gap. In 2010, the government lowered FDI restrictions, especially in services. The 2009 law on local taxes limits the types of levies local governments can charge and promotes tax competition. Energy subsidies are economically costly, socially inequitable, environmentally damaging and inconsistent with the government’s green strategy. The 2010 Medium Term Development Plan states that fossil-fuel subsidies will be eliminated by 2014. The government has increased support to renewable forms of energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). ; Chart C: OECD, Product Market Regulation Database and Woelf, A. The government abolished the Early Childcare Supplement which is being replaced in 2010 by a new pre-school Early Childhood and Education Scheme for those aged 3½ to 4½. Work is ongoing to build a second North-South and an East-West electricity interconnector. The electricity regulator announced in 2010 that it would end price regulation in the domestic retail market. The government created from May 2010 a new Department of Enterprise, Trade and Innovation aimed at enhancing the delivery of the R&amp;D agenda, with a focus on stronger commercial outputs and the efficiency of expenditure. In 2009 the government expanded the training-and-work experience activation places targeted at vulnerable groups. The government announced 15000 additional places in the 2011 Budget, and its intention to streamline Public Employment Services (PES) in the 2011-14 National Recovery Plan (NRP). The government announced in the 2011-14 NRP its intention to introduce water metering for homes. Water charges will be based on consumption above a free allocation. –0.1 –0.9 –0.2 –1.0 –1.2 –0.8 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). No. 88 A reform in lower-secondary education (New Horizon), which increases teachers’ pay while introducing more small-group teaching was extended to all schools in the 2009/10 school year. Other ongoing reforms include extension of compulsory education, reduction of class sizes, changes to final examinations and modifications to school-funding formulae. The authorities have partially liberalised land ownership and reformed land administration (the Land Reform Bill, 2009). First steps towards a one-stop-shop system for small and medium enterprises were taken in 2010. In port services, initial public offerings for the two operating companies and changes to service fee regulations were made in 2010. In telecoms, a schedule of cuts in the mobile phone connectivity fee has begun. In electricity generation, a payment guarantee to encourage private providers has been introduced. The schedule of income tax cuts was tempered in 2009. In 2010, a temporary hike in VAT was extended and there are proposals for increases in other indirect taxes. Policies took a backwards step in 2010 with the abandonment of a promising private-sector job-placement scheme (the Wisconsin Programme), which had been operating in several areas of the country since 2005. –0.1 –0.3 –0.4 –0.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, PISA 2009 Database ; Chart C: OECD, ; Chart D: World Bank, Some backward action occurred in 2009 through less-than-full implementation of 2006 legislation on professional services. Fully implement and extend the 2006 Policies announced in 2009 aim to improve cost-efficiency but action so far concentrated on broader funding cuts. Reductions in 2009 in income taxes on overtime or productivity pay seem to have done little to reduce the overall tax wedge on labour. A partial amnesty in 2009 and 2010 for funds held abroad raised one-off revenue but gave ambiguous incentives for tax compliance. Alitalia was privatised in 2008-09, no action taken since. –0.2 –0.3 –0.3 –0.3 –0.3 –0.4 –0.3 –0.5 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD (2010), ; Chart D: OECD, The privatisation process of Japan Post Bank and Japan Post Insurance, which were to be completed by 2017, has been stopped. The government proposed revising the Broadcast Act to integrate broadcasting services and communications. Enhance efficiency in the network sectors – particularly electricity – through further deregulation and privatisation, while strengthening competition policy. The privatisation of Japan Post should be carried out as outlined in the 2005 law in order to encourage the flow of funds towards more productive private-sector investments. The government implemented a direct income support programme for targeted cereals, including rice, on a trial basis in 2010. The government revised the Employment Insurance Act to relax the conditions for receiving benefits in 2009 and expanded the number of workers covered by the insurance in 2010. The low stock of inward FDI – the smallest in the OECD area at 4% of GDP – limits competition, especially in services. The government decided to establish a special zone system to revitalise local economies, including by attracting foreign firms. In 2010, it announced a programme to facilitate inward FDI to make Japan a hub in Asia. The government decided in 2010, in principle, to reduce the effective corporate tax rate to the average of major countries and to review tax expenditures to expand the tax base. –0.8 –0.9 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.4 –0.4 –0.6 –0.3 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 Chart B: OECD, Chart C: OECD Chart D: OECD, In 2009, the Presidential Council on Competitiveness announced plans to relax 26 market entry regulations by the end of 2010. The time and cost of starting new businesses has been significantly reduced. The government has reduced the volume and price of its purchases of barley with a view to phasing out the programme by 2012. Replace market price supports, which account for almost 90% of the support provided in 2008, with direct support for farmers. Stringent job protection on regular contracts has led to increased labour market dualism, as shown by the rise in the share of temporary workers from 17% of employment in 2001 to 28% in 2007. Such dualism is detrimental to human capital formation, productivity growth and equity. The three lower personal income tax rates were reduced in 2009-10 by 2 percentage points from a range of 8-26% to 6-24%. The corporate income tax rate was cut from 25% to 22% in 2009. The participation rate of women between the ages of 25 and 54 was only 62% in 2009, the fourth lowest in the OECD. Eligibility for taking the one-year parental leave was expanded in 2009 from those with children up to age three to all those with children too young for primary school. In 2010, the government launched a five-year plan to promote female participation through 60 policy priorities, focused mainly on promoting the re-employment of women who left the labour force after having children. –0.5 –0.4 –0.6 –1.2 –1.1 –1.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD, ; Chart D: OECD, No action taken to modify the pension system, but part of the increase in pensions due in January 2011 has been delayed to 2012. The 2008 Housing Pact Law aims to increase incentives for local authorities to boost housing development, and a five-year review of the procedure for construction authorisations is underway. –0.8 –0.8 –0.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD, ; Chart D: Duval, R. (2003), , No. 370 and OECD calculations. As part of the framework of the Alliance for Quality Education between the government and the main teachers’ union, spending on school infrastructure has increased and around 20 000 schools have been renovated. In 2010 a bonus is being paid out to schools achieving high scores on the national student test. Provide better support to schools to focus on improving learning outcomes, and hold directors and teachers accountable for results. Set clear national standards of teaching practice and student performance, aligned with a national curriculum. Improve initial teacher preparation, professionalise recruitment, selection and evaluation of teachers, and link teachers’ professional development to schools’ needs. Strengthen school leadership and management and build capacity to support school autonomy and social participation. e.g.  Assisted by the OECD, the government launched in 2007 a process for strengthening competitiveness in Mexico by promoting regulatory and competition policy reform. One outcome is the launch of an online one-stop shop that reduces the time to start a new business significantly. Authorities have initiated phone number portability and given permits to commercialise or resell mobile phone services. In 2010 the government completed two competitive bidding processes in telecommunications (radio-electric spectrum and dark optical fibre network). A reform bill that strengthens competition law has passed the lower chamber of Congress. Approval in the upper chamber is pending. A review of the existing stock of regulations was launched by the President in early 2010 to increase regulatory certainty, among other objectives. A comprehensive energy sector reform was implemented in 2008-09, which establishes a statutory increase in PEMEX independence and accountability, and allows cash incentives for contractors that meet pre-specified performance objectives. However, profits and property rights on hydrocarbons will not be shared. PEMEX’s investment will be excluded from the fiscal balance rule. –0.1 –0.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). First-time graduation rates for single year of age at upper secondary level, years 2006 and 2008. Average score of student performance in mathematics, science and reading. Index OECD = 100. Chart A: OECD, No. 88 PISA 2009 Database GDP per capita is at par with the average of the upper half of OECD countries, due to a combination of high hourly productivity and employment offset by a low number of hours worked per employee. In 2009, the government introduced a number of policy measures to increase activation and hours worked, but in order to improve economic performance other reforms are necessary in the following areas. In 2009 local courts adopted guidelines limiting severance payments awarded through judicial procedures, though such payments remains generous compared with other countries. The previous government proposed to cap severance pay at one year’s salary for incomes above EUR 75 000. ex post Starting from 2010, new participants in the programme for the young disabled (Wajong) are entitled to job support rather than passive income support. Participants are assessed upon entry and again at the age of 27, and can only subsequently be transferred to passive income support. The transferability of the individual tax credit is being phased out gradually (by 2025), reducing the marginal taxation of low-income second earners. Starting from 2009 the combination tax credit is income dependant to encourage lower-earning partners to extend working hours. In 2009 the government tightened job requirements for the long-term unemployed and introduced a temporary top-up on the initial salary in order to make work pay. –0.2 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD (2010), ; Chart D: OECD, An Electricity Authority was established in October 2010, and a Productivity Commission is to be established in early 2011 – both arms-length Crown agencies. The government plans to regulate mobile termination charges in the interest of consumers. The government is helping to fund a major roll-out of broadband. Have clearer, fewer and more efficient regulations as part of the government’s programme to raise living standards. Pass the Regulatory Responsibility Bill. Remove consent rules for foreign acquisitions of 25% or more in larger firms, and clarify the criteria for protecting Boost value for money in health care by developing better output and quality measures, strengthening public health providers’ accountability for performance, and using more competitive contracting for public funds. Continue to improve access and service quality for minority groups with an increased focus on the prevention and management of chronic illnesses. –0.3 –0.3 –0.4 –0.1 –0.3 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, PISA 2009 Database ; Chart D: Koyama, T. and S. S. Golub (2006), OECD’s FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index: Revision and Extension to More Economies , No. 525. No action taken. Since 2008, employers and employees are supposed to plan for re-entry of workers on sick leave or disability pensions, but workers still tend to respond rationally to a generous system by reducing labour supply. Some small backward measures were taken in 2010: the exemption of certain books from price maintenance prohibition was extended for four years, even though higher educational books will be subject to free pricing from 2011. New controls on retail outlets to limit their environmental impact were introduced. From 2009, candidates for teacher training must meet more stringent entry requirements. Municipalities must prepare reports using national indicators, but not including publicising information on school performance. No recent action on income tax. The discount applied to real estate in the wealth tax is to be reduced from 2010, but not eliminated. –0.2 –0.2 –0.5 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Data refer to GDP mainland Norway which excludes petroleum production and shipping. While total GDP overestimates the sustainable income potential, mainland GDP slightly underestimates it since returns on the financial assets the petroleum fund holds abroad are not included. Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD (2010), ; Chart D: OECD, A privatisation programme encompassing 800 firms, launched for 2009 and 2010, will be partly accomplished, generating receipts of about 2% of GDP. The government has announced further privatisation projects for 2011 to 2013. Barriers to entrepreneurship have recently been lowered with the creation of one-stop shops. A law promoting attendance in public pre-schools for five-year old children was passed in 2009. A cut in personal income tax rates in 2009 reduced the tax wedge. The government significantly tightened access to early retirement (bridge pensions) resulting from difficult work conditions. The quality of Poland’s transport infrastructure and fixed broadband penetration are among the lowest in the OECD. Electricity generation relies heavily on outdated coal-fired plants. Make the release of zoning plans by municipalities mandatory, introduce compulsory escrow accounts to protect buyers’ advances, further relax rent controls, and ease labour shortages by strengthening vocational training. –1.4 –1.3 –0.2 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, OECD Economic Outlook No.  ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD (2010), ; Chart D: OECD (2010), The authorities raised the compulsory education age from 15 to 18 in 2009, revised teacher performance evaluation in 2010 and have continued to expand vocational educational and training (VET) and to implement tertiary education reforms. Enhance career guidance and employers’ involvement in VET. Reduce school-year repetition through more efficient interventions targeted to at-risk individuals. Implement training for teacher evaluation and link it to school evaluation. Continue to upgrade working adults’ qualifications, at both secondary and tertiary levels. Ensure systematic monitoring and external assessment of all major reforms. The authorities increased the threshold surface limit for regulation of large outlets in 2009 and introduced legislation to make their opening hours more flexible in 2010. Sectoral regulators have lowered mobile phone termination charges and are introducing performance contracts in railways in 2010. The authorities imposed a cap on benefit replacement rates and made refusal of job offers more difficult in 2010. A small but growing number of municipalities have been joining Simplex Autárquico, a simplification programme. In 2010 the authorities have announced legislation to abolish licensing for some services. Foster wide participation in Simplex Autárquico and broaden its scope, especially as regards collaboration between central and local authorities in licensing. –0.4 –0.2 –0.6 –0.3 –0.4 –0.5 –0.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . , OECD Economic Outlook No.  Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). 2009 for Portugal, 2008 for the EU and the OECD. Chart A: OECD, OECD Economic Outlook No.  ; Chart B: OECD (2010), ; Chart C: OECD, ; Chart D: OECD, The income gap with OECD countries narrowed rapidly until 2008, but remained large and widened in 2009, as Russia was relatively hard-hit by the economic and financial crisis. This income gap is almost entirely attributable to a labour productivity shortfall, making productivity-enhancing reforms a priority. The Law on Strategic Industries came into force in 2008, defining 42 sectors in which foreign acquisitions require prior government approval. Several discriminatory trade measures were introduced during the crisis, and some have been extended. The government stepped up privatisation efforts in 2010. The list of strategic enterprises for which privatisation requires presidential approval has been reduced. The government has promoted the appointment of independent directors to the boards of state-owned enterprises. A series of laws have been adopted within the framework of the Concept of Administrative Reform approved in 2005 and the anti-corruption initiative. A five-year programme of reform and development of the civil service was launched in 2009. launched in 2005. The financing of the health care system has been increased and a range of measures to improve prevention are being put in place. A law was adopted in November 2010, reforming the framework for operation of the mandatory health insurance system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: World Bank (2010), ; Chart D: OECD, The rapid convergence in GDP per capita relative to the upper half of OECD countries observed since 2000 stopped in 2009 but productivity convergence continued. Substantial gaps in labour utilisation and productivity remain. The 2009 recovery plan introduced flexible work time accounts enabling firms to better adapt to the economic cycle. To improve longer-term economic performance further actions are needed in the following areas. Since 2009, the public funding of universities relies more on output indicators. The government finalised the second phase of an action plan for assessing administrative burdens on business and barriers to entry in 2009. The statutory retirement age for women is being gradually raised and should reach 62 by 2014. Childcare subsidies have been reformed to allow parents to receive the benefit while working (from January 2011). A portion of state funds which were previously used to support construction of owner-occupied housing has been diverted to rental housing projects in 2009 and 2010. The government introduced new public subsidies and tax relief to foster business R&amp;D in 2009 and plans to support highly innovative firms by providing –0.4 –0.5 –0.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, PISA 2009 Database ; Chart C: OECD (2004), ; Chart D: OECD, Some privatisation has been undertaken, particularly in the retail food and banking sectors. The two State funds significantly reduced the number of companies in their portfolios, though the State increased its ownership share in strategic firms. Parliament adopted legislation in 2010 establishing a central ownership agency to manage State assets. In October 2010, Parliament adopted a The government presented to Parliament in October 2010 a new draft legislation that seeks to increase the retirement age, extend contributory period requirements and reduce the generosity of pension benefits. The minimum wage was increased by 23% in early 2010 to be implemented by 2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, .  ; No. Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: ; Chart D: OECD (2010), South Africa’s network industries are dominated by state-owned firms, with legal barriers to entry in some cases and inbuilt advantage for the near-monopoly incumbents. As a result, product market regulation in energy, transport and communications is more restrictive than in almost all OECD countries, hampering productivity. Unemployment rates for the 15-24 age group approach 50% overall, and exceed that threshold for the black African population, reflecting a number of factors, including labour market policy weaknesses. Public works programmes were expanded in 2009 as a short-term measure to mitigate unemployment. The 2010 Budget Review proposed a wage subsidy for young and/or inexperienced workers. . . . . . . –1.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). Secondary educational attainment measures the share of the population aged 25-34 that has reached at least lower-secondary education. Chart A: World Bank (2010), ; Chart B: Samir et al. Projection of Population by Level of Education Attainment, Age and Sex for 120 countries for 2005-2050 , International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis Interim Reports; Chart C: ; Chart D: ICTWSS Database 3.1 The high school drop-out rate in lower secondary education limits pupils’ labour-market prospects. The government has proposed nation-wide testing of all pupils and has taken steps to facilitate the transition of academically-weak pupils from lower secondary to vocational upper secondary education. Draft legislation has been presented to parliament to adapt vocational schools’ curricula to local businesses’ needs and improve access of graduates to tertiary education. The 2010 labour market reform substantially eases the conditions for firms to opt out from higher-level collective bargaining agreements. Abolish the legal extension of collective wage agreements. Simplify the system of collective bargaining, giving more room for wages and other work conditions to be decided at the firm level. The 2010 labour market reform is expected to make it easier for firms to have dismissals accepted as justified, potentially reducing dismissal costs significantly. The reform also facilitates the use of permanent contracts with reduced severance pay. From 2012, employers will pay a yet to be specified part of the dismissal compensation into a fund from which the workers will be able to draw upon dismissal, retirement, training or mobility purposes. The government reform tightens the use of temporary contracts progressively between 2012 and 2015. The national license requirement for large surface outlets was abolished in 2010, but regional governments may still require an authorisation under overriding reasons related to public interest. The transposition of the EU services directive outlaws the use of economic criteria for licensing requirements. –0.4 –0.4 –0.4 –0.3 –0.4 –0.2 No. 88: ; Chart C: Duval, R. (2003), "The Retirement Effects of Old-Age Pension and Early Retirement Schemes in OECD Countries", Tighter administration, time limits on eligibility and measures to promote rehabilitation have lowered sickness absence rates. Temporary disability benefits are in the process of being phased out in 2010. The lower threshold for the state income tax was raised in 2009 and the in-work tax credit was expanded in 2009 and 2010. Outright ownership of owner-occupied apartments was introduced for new apartment buildings in 2009. New regulations, entering into force in 2011, require municipal housing companies to follow market principles. Continue to reduce rent regulation. Reverse the housing taxation cut implemented in 2007. University tuition fees will be introduced for students outside the European Economic Area in 2011. In tertiary education, financial support for students has been increased and places in the regular system have been temporarily expanded. Admission criteria have been reformed to encourage direct transition from upper secondary to tertiary education. –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD (2010), ; Chart D: OECD, The decline in real GDP per capita vis-á-vis the best performing OECD countries has stopped due to a relative increase in labour utilisation while the gap in productivity remains. Actions have been taken in several areas, notably regarding the prudential supervision of systemically important banks, including through stricter capital and liquidity requirements. Reforms in the following areas are still needed to improve trend economic growth. Strengthen the regulator’s powers, strengthen vertical separation and introduce benchmark regulation in the electricity sector. Remove legal restrictions on competitors’ access to the incumbent’s local loop in telecommunications. Sell remaining government stakes in electricity generation, and telecommunications. Privatise the incumbent postal services provider. The central government will continue to co-fund childcare facilities until 2014. Parliament has approved a tax allowance for child care expenses. Many cantons have agreed to start compulsory schooling at four years. Introduce a nation-wide voucher scheme to subsidise childcare services. Move from joint to individual tax assessment of each spouse’s income. Hospital funding based on diagnosis-related groups will be introduced by 2012. The government will implement measures to reduce medication-related health insurance costs. A new law coordinates the policy of the Confederation and the cantons towards tertiary academic education and adopts best practice in accreditation and quality assurance. Most cantons have agreed to postpone tracking of pupils to age 13. Make government sponsored loans to students widely available, coupled with an income-contingent repayment scheme, but raise fees in tertiary academic education. Review the mix of vocational and academic education content within upper secondary vocational tracks. Postpone tracking to at least 13 years. –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, ; Chart C: OECD, ; Chart D: OECD (2004), the upper half of OECD countries narrowed in the 2000s but remains very large, reflecting both low labour productivity and utilisation levels. Strong catch-up until the 2009 crisis reflected mainly productivity gains, while labour utilisation remained very low. A new draft Commercial Code has been prepared and should be adopted to improve financial transparency and facilitate financing investment. Structural reforms in the areas below are needed to improve overall economic performances. introduced in late 2008 reduced tax wedges for all workers and, in a higher proportion but temporarily, for young and female workers. Additional reductions were granted in selected provinces and for all new hires across Turkey at the end of 2009 as part of the crisis response. Limit the growth of official minimum wages and differentiate them across regions. Continue reducing social security contributions and make these cuts permanent. Reduce pension benefits in actuarially neutral terms and top them up with a voluntary savings scheme into which the difference would be paid between the employees [ldquoe]current (high) and future (low) social security taxes. Employment protection is rigid for both permanent and – especially – temporary workers, contributing to maintaining resources in inefficient informal and semi-formal activities. No action taken. The government announced in 2010 that a new National Employment Strategy will be introduced.  3.0 –0.2 –0.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). First-time graduation rates for single year of age at upper secondary level, years 2006 and 2008. Average score of student performance in mathematics, science and reading. Index OECD = 100. Chart A: OECD, No. 88 Education at a Glance; OECD, PISA 2009 Database ; Chart C: OECD, ; Chart D: OECD, The previous government introduced a number of schemes to improve standards of literacy and numeracy. The current government is introducing a pupil premium for disadvantaged students. It also plans to raise the secondary school leaving age to 18 years by 2015. Investment in infrastructure has been increased substantially in recent years, partly as a consequence of bringing forward investment during the recession. However, investment remains low compared with other OECD countries and current plans envisage a sharp fall in spending after 2010. The Pathways to Work scheme now applies to all new and most existing claimants under 50. A new eligibility test has been introduced. Extend the Pathways to Work scheme to all existing claimants. Monitor health status of applicants earlier than the mandatory 13 weeks. –0.4 –0.4 –0.3 Outlook No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD (2010), ; Chart C: OECD, PISA 2009 Database ; Chart D. World Bank, Improve teacher education and development using evidence on approaches that have proven to be effective in raising student achievement. Strengthen schools’ accountability for student progress. The 2010 health reform expands coverage and pays for it through health expenditure savings and additional taxes. The reform includes measures to reduce expenditure in the long term but there is much uncertainty about their effects. Congress should not override the Medicare expenditure restraints in the 2010 reform. Medicare provider payment reforms that prove to be successful in pilot tests should be adopted. The health tax exclusion (  the exclusion from taxable income and payroll tax of compensation in the form of health insurance cover) should be limited further than planned to reduce incentives to buy health plans with little cost sharing. Reduce support for agricultural producers – notably tariffs on imported ethanol and sugar – and dairy price supports. –0.4 –0.3 –0.6 –0.3 –0.1 –0.4 –0.2 –0.2 –0.2 No. 88: Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per hour worked (in constant 2005 PPPs). For the United States average in mathematics and science only in 2006. Chart A: OECD, No. 88 ; Chart B: OECD, PISA 2009 Database ; Chart C: OECD, ; Chart D: OECD, i.e.  monthly values multiplied by 12) even if the maximum benefit duration is shorter than 12 months. After tax and including unemployment benefits, social assistance, family and housing benefits in the 60th month of benefit receipt. Data for Italy and Turkey are equal to zero in 2005 and 2008. For Turkey, the average worker earnings (AW) value is not available; calculations are based on the average production worker earnings (APW). Years 2006 and 2008. Average of implicit tax on continued work in early retirement route, average for 55 and 60-year-olds workers. Implicit tax on continued work in regular old-age pension systems, for 60-year-olds. Data for South-Africa is equal to zero in 2009. For France, year 2010. No. 370 and OECD calculations. Taking into account childcare fees and changes of taxes and benefits in case of a transition to a job paying two-thirds of average worker earnings in 2004. 2005 for Luxembourg; 2007 for Austria, Canada, France, Israel, Italy, Poland, the Slovak Republic, Spain and the United Kingdom. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive 2009 for France and Portugal. Data for Brazil, India and Indonesia are equal to zero in 2008. 2007 for Estonia, Israel and Indonesia. 2003 for Brazil, Estonia, Indonesia, Luxembourg and South Africa; 2001 for Greece, Hungary, Poland and Russia; 2000 for Israel. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive et al. , No. 799. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive et al. , No. 799. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive et al. , No. 799. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive Concerns complexity of government communication of rules and procedures as well as of licences and permit systems. Data for Austria, Italy, Korea, Mexico, Portugal and Spain are equal to zero in 2008. et al. , No. 799. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive OECD’s FDI regulatory restrictiveness index: revision and extension to more economies , No. 525. et al. , No. 799. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive Data for Chile, Iceland, Japan, Norway and the United States are equal to zero in 2008. et al. , No. 799. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive Data for Belgium, Germany, Iceland, Switzerland and the Slovak Republic are equal to zero in 2008. Data for Australia, New Zealand and South Africa are equal to zero in 2008. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive Data for the United Kingdom is equal to zero in 2008. Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive Index scale of 0-6 from least to most restrictive PISA is the Programme for International Student Assessment. OECD = 100. Housing and the Economy: Policies for Renovation This chapter is based on analysis in Andrews, D. Caldera-Sánchez, A. and Å. Johansson (2011), Governments intervene in housing markets to enhance people’s housing opportunities and to ensure equitable access to housing. These interventions include fiscal measures, such as taxes and subsidies; the direct provision of social housing or rent allowances; and various regulations influencing the quantity, quality and price of housing. Housing policies also have a bearing on overall economic performance and living standards, in that they can influence how households use their savings as well as residential and labour mobility, which is crucial for reallocating workers to new jobs and geographical areas. Indeed, as recent OECD analysis shows, effectively supervised financial and mortgage market development combined with policies that enhance housing supply flexibility are key for macroeconomic stability. The main conclusions of that analysis are summarised below, and each is then described in more detail in the remaining sections of this chapter: Financial liberalisation and mortgage innovations have increased access to credit and lowered the cost of housing finance. This has had positive implications for previously credit-constrained households, allowing them a better chance of owning their own home. But regulatory reforms in mortgage markets may also be behind a noticeable increase in house prices – by an average of 30% in OECD countries – and in house price volatility. Moreover, deregulation can pose risks for macroeconomic stability if it triggers a significant relaxation in lending standards and a subsequent increase in non-performing loans. This is why there is a need for regulatory oversight and prudent banking regulations. . Supply of new housing that is responsive to prices helps to avoid excessive volatility in house prices, but greater responsiveness can also translate into more volatile residential investment. Responsiveness can be increased by streamlining cumbersome construction licensing procedures, and – in countries with a shortage of land for residential construction – by encouraging the use of land through better linking the assessment of property value for tax purposes to the market value. Estimates suggest that increasing the responsiveness of housing supply from the low level that prevails in the Netherlands to the average OECD level would increase households’ annual mobility rate by around 50%, possibly because a responsive supply evens out housing costs across regions. e.g.  e.g.  The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law. came to an abrupt halt immediately before or as the crisis began (André, 2010). Large corrections in house prices in many countries reduced households’ wealth and consumption, as well as residential investment. New OECD analysis shows that past developments in real house prices and residential construction were not only affected by macroeconomic factors such as income and interest rates, but also by structural features and policies in housing and housing finance markets. These shaped the size and pattern of housing demand shocks, the responsiveness of supply and consequently overall residential construction and price patterns. This section explores these policies and their impacts. United Kingdom United States Housing finance markets have changed drastically over recent decades, reflecting a wave of financial reforms motivated by broader economic efficiency goals. Liberalisation significantly expands borrowing opportunities and lowers borrowing costs for housing, resulting in a substantial expansion in the supply of mortgage loans in many countries (ECB, 2009; Ellis, 2006). One key development has been the significant reduction in down payment requirements, enabling households to rely more on debt to finance housing investment. Requirements for high down payments tend to negatively affect lower income consumers and particularly younger households, who often have had less time to accumulate the necessary capital for a deposit. One measure of this down payment constraint is the maximum loan-to-value ratio – the maximum permitted value of the loan as a share of the market price of the property. The loan-to-value ratio has risen in many OECD countries, for example from 80% to 100% in Belgium, France and Spain between 1990 and 2000. In some cases commercial banks may grant a mortgage above the maximum loan-to-value ratio if a mortgage insurance is taken out, but often this is costly. Estimates suggest that a 10 percentage point decrease in the maximum loan-to-value ratio is associated with a 12% rise in the home ownership rate among younger low-income households ( i.e.  owners aged 25-34 years in the second income quartile). The effect for older households is much smaller. The same estimates imply that on average, over all age groups, a 10 percentage point increase in the loan-to-value ratio raises aggregate home ownership by 3%. The expansion in the availability of credit has increased housing demand and real house prices in many countries. Financial deregulation is estimated to have increased real house prices by as much as 30% in the average OECD country over 1980 to 2005. On the one hand, more competitive mortgage markets with more diverse funding sources, lenders and loan products are likely to strengthen economic resilience by facilitating housing equity withdrawal. Real house price volatility can be reduced by… A further improvement in banking supervision equivalent to that observed on average in OECD over the 1990-2005 period (based on an index sourced from Abiad et al. Reducing the maximum loan-to-value ratio by 10 percentage points. Increasing the estimated supply elasticity from the level observed in Ireland to the level in Canada (see  Reducing the tax relief on mortgage debt financing costs from the level observed in Netherlands to the level in Sweden (see  The policy experiments are roughly equivalent to the impact of a one standard deviation change in the policy variables of interest on real house price volatility. Estimates are based on random effects panel regressions for between 16 and 20 OECD countries, over the period 1980-2005. The dependent variable is the standard deviation in annual real house price growth and the model also controls for macroeconomic volatility and time fixed effects (see Andrews (2010) for details). No. 08, Vol. 266, International Monetary Fund; Andrews, D. (2010), Real House Prices in OECD Countries – The Role of Demand Shocks and Structural and Policy Factors No. 831. i.e.  loan that is in default or close to being in default), thereby jeopardising macroeconomic stability. For instance, lending standards in the United States were significantly relaxed during the housing boom: in 2001, only 8% of home purchasers had a down payment of zero, but by 2007 this figure had risen to 22% (US Census Bureau, 2007). Loans with very high loan-to-value ratios also became more common in other OECD countries, such as in the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, although they generally constituted a much smaller share of the loan pool than in the United States. The OECD estimates that the quality of banking supervision can have a large impact on house price volatility. For the average OECD country, a further improvement in supervisory arrangements equivalent to that observed over the 1990-2005 period could reduce real house price volatility by around 25%, all other things being equal (  whether a country adopted a capital adequacy ratio based on the Basel standard;  the extent to which banking supervision agencies are independent of executives’ influence;  if banking supervisory agencies conduct effective supervisions through on-site and off-site examinations; and  if the banking supervisory agency covers all financial institutions without exception (see Abiad et al., 2008 for more details). The price responsiveness of new housing investment determines the extent to which increases in demand for housing, for instance following easier access to credit, result in higher prices rather than in more housing investment. According to OECD estimates, the long-run price responsiveness of new housing supply tends to be relatively strong in North America and some Nordic countries, while it is weaker in continental European countries and the United Kingdom ( ; Caldera Sánchez and Johansson, 2011). Estimates of the long-run price elasticity of new housing supply where new supply is measured by residential investments. All elasticities are significant at least at the 10% level. A greater number indicates a more responsive supply. In the case of Spain, restricting the sample to the period 1995-2007, which would reflect recent developments in housing markets (such as the large stock of unsold houses resulting from the construction boom starting in 2000 and peaking in 2007-09), only slightly increases the estimate of the elasticity of housing supply from 0.45 to 0.58. Estimation period early 1980s to mid-2000s. Caldera Sánchez, A. and Å. Johansson (2011), , No. 837. e.g.  Despite this trade-off, in the longer term a more flexible supply of housing is generally desirable as it allows a better match of housing construction to changes in housing demand patterns across the territory. Estimates show that the influence of supply responsiveness on the reaction to housing demand shocks is likely to be large, all else being equal. For example, if the responsiveness of new supply is reduced from the relatively high level estimated for Japan to the level in New Zealand (see  ), the increase in house prices associated with a given increase in demand is at least 50% larger (Andrews, 2010). During recent decades very large price increases were observed in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands – in these two countries the responsiveness of new housing supply to housing prices is noticeably low ( ). By contrast, other countries where supply tends to be more flexible, such as the United States, experienced more moderate price increases. Estimates also show that house prices are more volatile where housing supply is rigid, because variations in demand translate more fully into changes in prices ( Housing supply may be constrained by both policy and non-policy factors. Geographical and demographic conditions – such as physical limitations on land for development and the degree of urbanisation – can restrict housing supply in certain areas. Indeed housing supply responsiveness tends to decrease as population density increases ( , Panel A). But public policies also play a role , Panel B). OECD estimations based on Caldera Sánchez, A. and Å. Johansson (2011), , No. 837; United Nations (2007), Housing supply can be made more responsive by designing and enforcing efficient land-use regulations, such as streamlining complicated construction licensing procedures and easing planning restrictions on multi-family construction (typically dwellings for rent) in order to increase the supply of private rental housing (Schuetz, 2007). Apart from improving land-use regulations, providing infrastructure and other public services along with housing – such as road junctions or water drainage – is also likely to influence supply ( e.g.  Barker, 2008). Moreover, well-designed taxes on vacant properties and undeveloped land can encourage the appropriate use of land for residential and business property in urban areas. For instance, linking the assessment of property value for tax purposes to the market value may increase incentives for developing vacant land as market prices also reflect its development potential (OECD, 2009). i.e.  , Panel A). In addition, there is also a link between residential mobility and reallocation of workers ( , Panel B). This suggests that residential mobility can make it easier for the labour force to adjust to changing employment availability, possibly speeding up the transition out of the current high rates of unemployment. These links between housing, mobility and the labour market are explored further in this section.  2% in Slovenia implying a move every 50 years) does not seem reasonable and may reflect problems with the underlying data. However, this is difficult to verify as there is no alternative data source. OECD calculations based on the following 2007 databases: European Commission (2007), Eurostat EU-SILC Database; Melbourne Institute (2007), The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey; Swiss Foundation for Research in the Social Sciences (2007), Swiss Household Panel (SHP); US Census Bureau (2007), American Housing Survey (AHS); OECD (2010),  OECD Employment Outlook 2010: Moving beyond the Jobs Crisis e.g.  e.g.  Oswald, 1996; Coulson and Fisher, 2009). On average, an owner without a mortgage is estimated to be 13% less likely to move every year than a private renter, while a mortgage owner’s yearly mobility rate is some 9% lower than that of a renter. These results should be interpreted with caution because causation cannot be easily established due to the possibility that households’ preferences for mobility influence the choice of tenure (so-called self-selection bias). See Caldera Sánchez and Andrews 2011 for details. et al., Tenants in social housing are on average 6% less likely than private tenants to move every year. This is perhaps because they are reluctant to give up below-market rents and tenancies which are generally more secure ( e.g.  Menard and Sellem,  2010; Flatau et al.,  2003; Hughes and McCormick, 1981; 1985). This is particularly the case in Australia, France and the United Kingdom, which may possibly reflect that in these countries social housing is highly targeted to those who need it most (see below). Housing allowances do not seem to hinder residential and labour mobility to the same extent as direct provision of social housing, especially if they are portable (ECB, 2003; Hughes and McCormick, 1981; 1985). An additional advantage of housing allowances over direct housing provision is that in a majority of countries households can receive rent allowances for any rental dwelling, i.e.  An unresponsive supply reduces the availability of housing and can contribute to regional price differentials and housing market imbalances – other factors in reducing residential mobility. Large price differentials between areas, for instance caused by rapid changes in housing demand within a region combined with rigid housing supply, can reduce geographical mobility. This is because households in cheaper areas have to secure greater credit if they wish to move to the higher-priced region (Saks, 2008; Barker, 2004; Cameron and Muellbauer, 1998). In countries with a more responsive supply of new housing, residential mobility tends to be much higher. For example, increasing the responsiveness of supply from the Netherlands’ low level ( ) to the OECD average would raise the household annual mobility rate by around 2.3 percentage points all else being equal ( The probability of moving each year can be increased by… 2.3 percentage points… Increasing the estimated price-elasticity of housing supply from the level in the Netherlands to the average level in the OECD (see  1.4 percentage points… Decreasing the rent control from the level in Germany to the average level in the OECD (see  1.4 percentage points… i.e.  increasing the loan-to-value ratio) by 20 percentage points from the level in Switzerland to the average level in the OECD. 1.1 percentage points… i.e.  0.6 percentage points… i.e.  tenant-landlord regulations) from the level in Portugal to the average level in the OECD (see  0.5 percentage points… Decreasing transaction costs from the level in Greece to the average level in the OECD (see  Memorandum item: Average annual probability to move in OECD countries = 6%. OECD calculations based on the following databases: European Commission (2007), Eurostat EU-SILC Database; Melbourne Institute (2007), The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey; Swiss Foundation for Research in the Social Sciences (2007), Swiss Household Panel (SHP); US Census Bureau (2007), American Housing Survey (AHS); Caldera Sánchez, A. and D. Andrews (2011), The costs involved in buying and selling houses can also reduce residential and labour mobility (Oswald, 1996; 1999; Haurin and Gill, 2002; van Ommeren and Leuvensteijn, 2005). Housing transaction costs differ considerably across OECD countries, ranging from at least 14% of property value in Belgium, France and Greece to less than 4% in Denmark and Iceland ( e.g.  Johansson, Å. (2011), e.g.  ) to the average level among the countries included in the study would increase the annual probability of moving by around 0.5 percentage points ( e.g.  , Panel A; and Johansson, 2011). While the causality is unclear, this might be explained by the fact that in countries with a larger rental sector there is more widespread demand for regulations governing its functioning. By contrast, rent control is lax in Finland, New Zealand, Slovenia, the United Kingdom and the United States. Most countries also regulate contractual aspects of tenant-landlord relations – such regulations tend to be comparatively strict in many continental European countries ( , Panel B), often going along with comparatively more stringent rent controls. One probable explanation is that if rent control is not coupled with security of tenure, in regimes where sitting tenants receive relatively more protection against rent increases landlords may have an incentive to evict tenants in order to raise rents (Arnott, 2003; Ellingsen and Englund, 2003). i.e.  Johansson, Å. (2011), e.g.  Lind, 2001; Nagy, 1997; Ball, 2009). Similarly, strict tenant-landlord regulation resulting in high tenure security can lower the expected returns from residential rental supply, thereby reducing investment or encouraging hoarding or alternative uses of the existing stock by owners. Together, the negative effects of excessive rental regulation on supply and tenants’ incentives to move may reduce turnover in the rental sector and lower residential mobility. , Panel A) to the average level among the countries included in the study would increase the annual mobility rate by around 1.4 percentage points ( ). In order not to deter mobility, regulations should also be harmonised across different segments of the housing market, including social and private rentals, and consideration should be given to easing stringent rental regulations. For example, because rent regulations in social housing tend to be stricter than in the private sector, this may discourage mobility among social tenants because moving into the private market could reduce their rent and tenure advantages (Flatau  et al.,  2003). Since changing residence involves financial costs, reducing the cost of credit and making it easier to access can aid mobility. This is confirmed by OECD evidence that easier access to credit (represented by the share of private credit in gross domestic product – GDP) and lower down-payment requirements (represented by higher maximum loan-to-value ratios) are associated with higher residential mobility ( et al., 2008). If house prices decline significantly, households in negative equity may be unable to refinance their mortgage in order to move to a more prosperous region or may be unwilling to sell their home at a loss. For instance, mobility in the United States declined by approximately 15% between 2005 and 2009, and this decline was concentrated amongst home owners with mortgages, and particularly the most leveraged in this group. This partly reflected adverse labour market developments, but also to some extent the sharp rise in the number of households with negative equity. Residential mobility appears to have fallen more in those US states that experienced a larger rise in the share of households in negative equity ( The impact of negative equity on residential mobility in the United States Percentage point change 2007-09 e.g.  i.e.  Johansson, Å. (2011), et al., 1996; Harris, 2010), particularly if housing supply responsiveness is rigid. This combination of policies would not necessarily expand housing opportunities for households. For example, the OECD estimates that if the extent of tax relief on mortgage debt financing was decreased from the level seen in Finland to that prevailing in France ( e.g.  following easier access to credit) would be around 50% smaller, all else being equal (Andrews, 2010). Moreover, there appears to be no cross-country evidence to suggest that greater mortgage deductibility coincides with higher overall home ownership rates. Instead, estimates suggest that through their indirect adverse effect on prices, generous housing tax relief on debt financing costs does little to encourage home ownership by lower-income households (Andrews and Caldera Sánchez, 2011). Distributional effects are complex and where there is capitalisation of the effects of tax relief, first-time (often low-income) home buyers are likely to benefit less than existing owners. Rental regulations are generally aimed at correcting market imperfections. For instance, one motivation for standardising rental contracts is to prevent landlords from exploiting their market power or tenants from abusing landlords’ property ( e.g.  e.g.  Turner and Malpezzi, 2003; Ellingsen and Englund, 2003). Across the countries covered in this chapter, there is no clear evidence that rent levels are lower in countries with stricter rent controls. Clearly households in rent-controlled dwellings benefit from lower rent, but because of poor targeting, many of these households have incomes which do not justify such controls. Therefore, these controls may achieve little in the way of income redistribution and they have large efficiency costs (O’Sullivan and de Decker, 2007; Ellingsen, 2003). Instead, rent regulations may redistribute income among different categories of tenants (Basu and Emerson, 2000). For instance, where rent is controlled landlords tend to inflate rents for new tenants in order to compensate for the loss of rent suffered during occupancy due to the control mechanisms. Thus, rent regulations may discriminate between those households who move often and those who stay and benefit from long rent-controlled tenancies. Moreover, as discussed earlier, if stringent rent regulations cap rent levels, they can potentially discourage new construction and maintenance by lowering the net return on these investments (Sims, 2007; Arnott, 2003). An illustrative correlation shows that across countries, stricter rent control tends to be associated with lower quantity and quality of rental housing, as measured by the share of tenants who lack space and who have a leaking roof ( ). Below-market rents may also encourage households to spend effort and resources on obtaining cheap housing, which can lead to waste of resources and a misallocation of existing housing (Glaeser and Luttmer, 1997). Johansson, Å. (2011), , forthcoming; European Commission (2007), Eurostat EU‑SILC Database. Despite its potentially adverse effects, well-designed rent control can be justified where the costs of moving are high and where insurance is not available for protecting tenants from sharp, unanticipated rent increases. However, rental regulations should strike a balance between landlords’ and tenants’ interests, provide reasonable security of tenure and avoid market segmentation between sitting and new tenants. A compromise could be a system in which rents can be varied for new contracts and for contract renewals, while rent increases are regulated in line with tenancy market developments within the duration of the contract, coupled with an adequate security of tenure. e.g.  e.g.  in Austria, the Czech Republic, Ireland, the Netherlands, the Nordic countries, Poland and the United Kingdom), while playing only a minor role in others ( e.g.   In the majority of countries social housing is targeted at certain households ( e.g.  ii)  i.e.  e.g.  Estonia Korea Mexico Norway Slovak Republic Switzerland United States Czech Republic Finland France United Kingdom Johansson, Å. (2011), The allocation and governance of social housing are complex. In principle, a targeted system is to be preferred as it can focus on households in greatest need of housing and therefore achieve its goals at a lower cost than less targeted social housing systems. However, highly targeted needs-based systems can encourage spatial segregation (Fitzpatrick and Stephens, 2007). Such residential segregation can result in significant disparities in the quality of and access to education, as well as in access to transport networks and public services ( e.g.  Galster, 2007). This can have negative consequences for individual labour market outcomes and potential adverse effects on overall economic performance. e.g.  Thus, such programmes should be designed to avoid spatial concentration by ensuring that location of social housing is well integrated in the urban structure. It is also important to frequently reassess a household’s eligibility for social housing, and to increase the rent or terminate the contract with advance notice if the household’s situation has improved. This frees up social housing for needier households. An additional complication is that means-tested social housing systems may potentially reduce job-seeking incentives amongst the unemployed, or discourage low-wage workers from seeking higher paid jobs if social housing is withdrawn or rents are increased as earned income grows. The design and phasing out of social housing benefits should minimise any such adverse effects. The direct provision of social housing is only one way in which governments attempt to enhance housing opportunities for low-income households. Many countries also have some form of means-tested allowances for rental accommodation. The design, take-up and generosity of rental allowances vary widely across countries. They appear to be most significant in Ireland, the United Kingdom and some Nordic countries in terms of the value and coverage of subsidies. Where housing supply is constrained in the short run, however, part of the benefit of government rent allowances may shift from renters to landlords without necessarily enhancing housing availability for needy households. Indeed, there is some evidence that rent allowances are passed onto higher rents ( e.g.  Gibbons and Manning, 2003; Kangasharju, 2003; Susin, 2002). Thus, such allowances may entail fiscal costs without necessarily providing large improvements in housing opportunities for low-income households, particularly if supply is rigid. Moreover, like social housing, rent allowances can undermine work incentives, particularly for second-earners, if benefits are phased out as earned income increases ( e.g.  et al., 2008). Even so, well-designed portable housing allowances – for instance, systems where the size of the subsidy is based on a norm rent and only to be used for housing costs – may be preferable to the direct provision of social housing as they do not seem to directly hinder residential mobility. Global current account imbalances widened markedly in the years prior to the crisis in both OECD countries and non-OECD countries. Though the crisis brought some reversal of this trend in 2009, imbalances remain wide and in some countries may be widening again. If policies do not change, the issue of imbalances worldwide and within the euro area is likely to remain of concern. Structural reforms – such as of social welfare systems, labour, product and financial market regulation and taxation – are not generally designed to address global imbalances. However, such reforms can affect current accounts by influencing household and firms’ saving and investment decisions, as well as altering public saving and investment. For this reason, they have regularly been advocated to help reduce global imbalances in the G20 context. This chapter provides new empirical evidence on the current account impact of structural policies in the areas of social welfare systems, labour, product and financial market regulation and taxation. It explores two questions: ) How can structural policy reforms influence saving and investment? Since a country’s current account position is equal to the gap between domestic saving and investment, the chapter focuses on the impact of reforms on saving and investment separately, drawing implications for current accounts. ) How can fiscal tightening and structural reforms reduce global imbalances in practice? Scenario analysis quantifies the impact of possible reform packages on the size of imbalances worldwide, and within the euro area. While current account constellations result from a global general equilibrium, the chapter mainly focuses on the impact of domestic reforms on domestic saving and investment, assuming unchanged foreign policies. et al. Reforms that raise public revenues or reduce expenditures strengthen a country’s total saving rate and its current account balance, all else being equal. ) by raising saving in countries where unemployment benefits are low as households save more for precautionary motives; and ) by reducing investment, at least in OECD countries, reflecting weaker substitution of capital for labour. i.e.  The eventual removal of policy distortions that encourage consumption, such as tax deductibility of interest payments on mortgages in the absence of taxation of imputed rent (see Chapter 4), might help increase household saving and reduce external deficits in a number of countries, not least the United States, though implementation would have to await greater stabilisation of the economy. Fiscal tightening to stabilise debt-to-GDP ratios in OECD countries by 2025 could reduce the size of global imbalances by almost one-sixth. Global imbalances could decline by twice as much if China, Germany and Japan were to deregulate their product markets and China were to raise public health spending by 2 percentage points of GDP (in a fiscally-neutral way) and liberalise its financial markets. Global current account imbalances widened markedly in the years preceding the global economic crisis. The United States had the biggest deficit, while several of the fast-growing Asian and oil-producing countries, as well as Germany and Japan, had the largest surpluses ( , Panel A). While the euro area’s current account balance with the rest of the world was relatively small, a number of individual member countries recorded either sizeable and growing deficits (in particular Greece, Portugal and Spain) or surpluses (next to Germany mainly the Netherlands; , Panel B). The current account balance of a country is equal to the gap between its national saving and investment rates. Although a few countries have experienced sizeable changes in investment rates, rising saving rates in surplus countries and falling saving rates in deficit countries were the dominant drivers of their divergent current account positions ( The increase in current account imbalances is mirrored by widening saving-investment gaps – China, Japan, Germany and the United States, 1990-2010 The economic crisis led to a substantial narrowing of global current account imbalances as well as to a change in their composition. While tighter credit conditions, rising labour market uncertainty and efforts to make up for the sudden wealth losses caused household saving rates in developed countries to rise from their pre-crisis levels, this was generally more than offset by lower government saving. At the same time, total investment rates fell substantially in most countries, driven by declines in business investment and, at least in those countries that had experienced house price and construction booms in the run-up to the crisis, falling residential investment. The narrowing of global current account imbalances is unlikely to be permanent, however, and indeed as the recovery unfolds imbalances are widening again (OECD, 2010a). Households hold a certain amount of precautionary wealth as a cushion against unexpected adverse events such as unemployment, sickness or disability. This amount of precautionary wealth, and with it the level of precautionary saving, depends on the risk aversion of the household, the probability of adverse events and their expected severity. While policy is unlikely to affect households’ aversion to risk, it may well affect the other two factors. For example, a rise in public spending on health may reduce the likelihood of diseases through higher-quality preventive medicine and may reduce the private cost of sickness through better public insurance. New OECD research yields evidence that a higher share of GDP spent on public health provision is associated with lower household saving rates (  and OECD country, a 1 percentage point increase in the GDP share of public health spending (that is financed and thus does not affect the government’s budget balance) may reduce the total saving rate and therefore the current account balance by almost 2 percentage points of GDP, all else being equal. This is consistent with existing evidence, see  e.g.  et al. For example, in China, this increase in public health spending would reduce the current account surplus by as much as 2.5 percentage points of GDP. For a detailed analysis of the Chinese health care system and reform potentials see OECD (2010b). The analysis has been carried out for two data sets, the first one covering 30 OECD countries between 1965 and 2008 and the second covering a total of 117 OECD and non-OECD economies between 1993 and 2008. The large time span of the first data set has allowed for the estimation of both the immediate and the longer-run reactions of saving, investment and current accounts to changes in policy settings. While the second dataset is more limited in its time span and the range of policies covered, it has allowed a broader set of countries to be studied, and has also facilitated the analysis of policies that change little over time or for which indicators are not available over long periods. ) It does not explicitly account for the joint determination of current accounts and other macroeconomic outcomes. In particular, the (real) exchange rate is not included in the set of explanatory variables as both it and the current account are simultaneously driven by the determinants of saving and investment. The equations include other variables that may also be jointly determined with the current account ( e.g.  ) The approach does not allow for distinguishing between different types of reforms ( e.g.  ) The approach treats saving and investment decisions separately. This assumption of independence between saving and investment is unlikely to be true in reality as capital markets are imperfectly integrated. ) Structural policies are likely to influence saving and investment decisions through changes in the macroeconomic control variables, reducing the chances of finding significant direct effects of the policy variables themselves. No. 815. –1.9 – –1.9 –1.3 –1.9 Increase in the statutory retirement age by 1 year –0.5 – –0.5 – –0.4 – –0.1 The effects refer to reforms that do not lead to changes in the government’s budget balance. Average change between 1998 and 2008 (or the latest available year). No. 815. No. 815. In the same vein, the precautionary saving behaviour of households may be influenced by the level and duration of unemployment benefits – higher or longer-lasting benefits could reduce households’ need to save for For example, Engen and Gruber (2001) show for the United States that cutting the unemployment benefit replacement rate by half would increase gross financial asset holdings by 14% for the average worker. et al. et al. (1995), Gruber and Yellowitz (1999) and Nam (2008) for evidence from the United States. However, Hurst and Ziliak (2006) and Sullivan (2006) could not find any evidence of this effect. Pension reforms can also affect individual households’ saving rates. Reforms that improve the sustainability of pension systems by cutting pension benefits should increase the saving rates of the working-age population as households attempt to accumulate more wealth in order to cushion themselves from reduced income in retirement. Existing empirical analysis backs this up, showing that benefit cuts raise private saving, especially for workers aged between 35 and 45. et al. et al. , 2010) confirms other research (Kirsanova and Sefton, 2007) which finds that increasing the statutory retirement age lowers total and private saving rates. The estimates suggest that a rise in the statutory retirement age by one year reduces total and private saving rates by around half a percentage point of GDP. This effect should, however, gradually fade away as existing generations get older and new ones have fuller knowledge of the new features of the system. Labour market policies should affect individuals’ saving, as well as investment behaviour. While labour market institutions such as the level of the minimum wage and the bargaining power of unions may a priori e.g.  et al ., 2003). et al. , 2010). In this case the higher likelihood of dismissal is apparently the dominant factor influencing households’ saving decisions. For OECD countries, by contrast, there is no evidence that the saving rate is influenced by EPL, possibly because the comparatively higher level of unemployment benefits in these countries provides an alternative way to insure income against the risk of job loss. e.g.  et al. , 2003; Javoric and Spatareanu, 2005). There is even some evidence that strict employment protection in a firm’s home country makes the firm reluctant to relocate abroad, at least temporarily (Dewit et al. , 2009). The same effects should be caused by more stringent employment protection which increases hiring and firing costs. New OECD analysis cannot find much evidence that the investment rate is influenced by minimum wages or union bargaining power – possibly because the effects are small or the available indicators and the empirical approach are insufficient to identify such effects (Kerdrain et al. , 2010). However, it does suggest that less stringent EPL (in particular for temporary workers) might lower investment and improve the current account in OECD countries. But the effect is at best small: a typical EPL reform would reduce private and total investment only by around 0.1 percentage points of GDP. et al. et al. , 2010). For example, aligning the level of economy-wide PMR in Japan and Germany with OECD best practice could increase total investment – and hence reduce their current accounts, all else being equal – by 0.15 and 0.25 percentage points of GDP respectively. e.g.  by lowering transaction costs) or by influencing the rate of productivity growth. et al., et al.,  2000). Others are unable to establish a significant relationship (Cheung et al. et al. , 2010). It finds that financial market reforms only reduce saving in countries with GDP per capita levels below half of the US level ( ). So, for example, if China liberalised its financial system as much as it did between 1995 and 2005, its total saving rate and thus the current account surplus could drop by over 3 percentage points of GDP. BRIICS = Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China and South Africa. PPP = Purchasing power parity. The shaded area indicates the 90% statistical confidence interval around the estimated effect. Financial market reform is measured by the change in the financial reform index (Abiad , 2010). This ranges from 0 to 21, with 0 being the least and 21 being the most liberal financial system. The figure shows the total saving rate response to a change in the financial reform index by 1.86, which corresponds to the average change in the index in OECD countries between 1995 and 2005. No. 815; Abiad, A., E. Detragiache and T. Tressel (2010), , No. 08/266, International Monetary Fund. Financial market reform should stimulate investment, not least by lowering the cost of acquiring and evaluating information on prospective projects and by reducing the risk of resource mismanagement through easier monitoring of investments. Financial market imperfections in emerging and developing countries might be one reason why these countries have partly invested in advanced countries such as the US (Caballero, 2006; Caballero et al. , 2008). However, where financial repression is associated with households supplying cheap capital to enterprises, liberalisation may raise the cost of capital and thus lower investment. Financial market reforms may also reduce the interdependence between saving and investment decisions, for example by relaxing borrowing constraints or by reducing information asymmetries that drive a wedge between internal and external costs of finance. Overall, several recent empirical studies support the view that deeper or more sophisticated financial markets are associated with higher investment and weaker current accounts (OECD, 2003; Chinn and Ito, 2007; Dorrucci et al.,  2009; Cheung et al. , 2010). New OECD analysis also points in this direction (Kerdrain et al. , 2010), but the results are somewhat less robust than those of previous studies. e.g.  See Summers (1984) for the United States and Koskela and Virén (1994) for Denmark, Finland and Sweden. et al. Measures such as corporate tax cuts or larger capital depreciation allowances may weaken the current account position by raising investment (Vartia, 2008; Schwellnus and Arnold, 2008; Hassett and Hubbard, 2002). Tax reforms may also affect the allocation of savings by applying different tax treatments to different types of capital income. An example would be to allow tax deductibility of interest expenses on mortgages where there is no taxation of imputed rent from housing (see Chapter 4). et al., et al., et al.,  2009), meaning that households do not increase their level of saving but only re-allocate saving from unsubsidised to subsidised forms. As for saving accounts not related to pensions, previous OECD research found that they only encourage saving when moderate-income households participate in them (OECD, 2007). Given the likelihood of and need for major fiscal tightening across the OECD over the coming years, two types of scenarios have been assessed (see  ) Only fiscal measures (ignoring structural reforms), with all OECD countries assumed to adjust their underlying primary balance ( i.e.  government net borrowing or net lending excluding interest payments on consolidated government liabilities) so as to stabilise the debt-to-GDP ratio by 2025. ) Both fiscal measures and structural reforms, the latter aimed at reducing current account imbalances in countries with sizeable deficits or surpluses. All OECD countries adjust their underlying primary balance so as to stabilise the debt-to‑GDP ratio by 2025 All OECD countries adjust their underlying primary balance so as to stabilise the debt-to-GDP ratio by 2025 Germany and Japan align their level of product market regulation with OECD best practice, and China implements product market reforms similar in size to those that happened in OECD countries between 1998 and 2008 China implements financial market reforms that are similar in magnitude to those undertaken between 1995 and 2005 All euro area countries adjust their underlying primary balance so as to stabilise the debt-to-GDP ratio by 2025 All euro area countries adjust their underlying primary balance so as to stabilise the debt-to-GDP ratio by 2025 shows the simulated impact of structural reforms and fiscal consolidation on the size of global and intra-euro-area imbalances. Global imbalances are measured as the GDP-weighted sum of the absolute saving-investment-gap-to-GDP ratios of all countries considered. Overall, as the need for fiscal tightening is generally stronger in external deficit countries than in surplus countries, global imbalances would narrow by about one-sixth as a result of fiscal consolidation, while the effect on intra-euro-area imbalances would be somewhat smaller. In the United States, fiscal consolidation would raise the aggregate saving rate and thereby reduce the current account deficit. However, due to private saving offsets and simultaneous fiscal tightening in other countries, the deficit would decline by less than the improvement in the government’s budget balance, i.e.  by just 1 percentage point of GDP instead of 7.3 percentage points of GDP over the next 15 years. In Japan, fiscal tightening would raise the current account surplus by about half a percentage point of GDP over the same period. In Germany, the current account surplus would fall, reflecting the smaller effort needed to stabilise the debt-to-GDP ratio compared with other countries. As for other euro area countries, substantial fiscal tightening would reduce current account deficits, especially in Greece, Portugal and Spain. The size of imbalances is measured as the sum of the absolute saving-investment-gap-to-GDP ratios of all countries in the region, weighted by 2009 GDP (in current USD). The current extent of imbalances (current situation) is calculated based on the current-account-to-GDP ratios in 2009. The impact of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms shown here would materialise after 15 years. No. 815. If countries were to implement structural reforms in addition to the fiscal measures, global imbalances would be reduced by about one-third over the next 15 years, compared with one-sixth in the purely fiscal scenario ( Due to time lags in the adjustment of saving and investment behaviour, the decline in current account imbalances will continue beyond the 15-year horizon. After 25 years, global (intra-euro-area) imbalances will have been reduced by 17% (12%) for fiscal consolidation only and by 34% (17%) for fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Removing competition-unfriendly PMR in China, Germany and Japan would temporarily reduce the current account surpluses in all three countries by boosting investment. An increase in public health expenditure in China (by 2 percentage points of GDP) would reduce the country’s current account surplus by about 4 percentage points of GDP. The decline in the surplus attributable to structural reforms could reach over 7½ percentage points of GDP if China were also to implement financial market reforms. Similarly, implementing these structural reforms in the euro area would help to narrow imbalances in the euro area countries. While the overall size of this effect would be rather modest, current account imbalances would be reduced significantly in the smaller euro area countries, where they are currently sizable. A New Look at OECD Health Care Systems: Typology, Efficiency and Policies Potential efficiency gains are the highest – extending life by over four years on average – in Denmark, Hungary, the Slovak Republic and the United States. For more than one-third of countries, better efficiency could improve life expectancy as much in the 10 years to 2017 as in the previous 10 years, while keeping health care spending constant. Improving efficiency would result in large public spending savings in most OECD countries, amounting to 1.9% of GDP on average by 2017. Savings would be over 3% of GDP for Greece, Ireland and the United Kingdom. The second part of the chapter outlines a new health care system typology to investigate the links between policy settings and health care system efficiency. This analysis, which allocates 29 OECD countries into six groups, suggests that no approach – switching from one type of system to another – may not necessarily improve efficiency much. However, this international comparison highlights areas of potential reforms and efficiency gains: of the bodies involved in health care management. This is especially needed at the interface between providers (hospitals and out-patient care), for the transition into long-term care, and where key health care decisions are fragmented across levels of government. This should be an area for investigation in Austria, Australia, Canada, Denmark, Italy, Mexico, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. e.g.  in the Czech Republic, Japan and Korea) or containing spending on the in-patient sector ( e.g.  where they are low and combined with wide patient choice among providers since this combination might induce excessive demand for care. Such a combination is found notably in the Czech Republic and Luxembourg. e.g.  e.g.  and improve the understanding of the reasons behind inequalities. For example, Mexico and Turkey should move further towards achieving universal coverage. More investigation is needed into whether inequalities in health status are created by extensive reliance on private insurance (Canada and France), and/or high out-of-pocket payments (Finland, Hungary, Poland and Slovak Republic). Mortality and longevity indicators all point in the same direction: health in the OECD has improved rapidly in recent decades. In 2008, life expectancy at birth reached 79 years on average in the OECD, a gain of more than 10 years since 1960. Over the same period, infant mortality was reduced by a factor of eight and life expectancy at age 65 increased by more than one-third. Mortality and longevity indicators are imperfect proxies, however, for the impact of the health care system since they also reflect socio-economic factors and lifestyle choices (such as smoking and diet) and do not account for the prevalence of diseases or disability. More sophisticated, but partial, indicators to assess health care outcomes are becoming available (OECD, 2009), though data limitations are still severe for international comparisons. Nevertheless, using them does not change the general picture. As an illustration, the number of people dying within 30 days of an acute myocardial infarction – a leading cause of death in most OECD countries – fell by a quarter between 2003 and 2007 on average for the 12 OECD countries for which data are available. Also revealing is the increase in survival rates after cancer. Large cross-country differences in health status persist, although they have narrowed. As an illustration, life expectancy at birth ranged from 73.6 years in Turkey in 2008 to 82.7 years in Japan, while there was a 25 year difference between the two extremes in 1960. But infant mortality in Hungary, Mexico, Poland, the Slovak Republic, Turkey and the United States is still more than double that in Finland, Japan and Sweden. Those countries which rank high on health status measures also tend to be characterised by a high quality of care, as measured by low rates of avoidable hospital admissions for specific diseases ( e.g.  Health care spending per capita rose by 74% in real terms between 1990 and 2008 on average in the OECD. Health care spending absorbed almost 10% of GDP in 2008, up from just over 5% in 1970 ( ). Most of the increase in health care spending has been financed by the public sector and spending on health care is now one of the largest government spending items – on average in the OECD in 2008 it absorbed 15% of general government spending, up from 12% in 1995. Furthermore, population ageing, rapidly rising health care prices and costly developments in medical technology are putting upward pressures on health care budgets. According to OECD projections, public health care spending could increase by 3.5 to 6 percentage points of GDP by 2050 on average across OECD countries (Oliveira Martins and de la Maisonneuve, 2007). Health care spending has increased faster than GDP between 1970 and 2008 Data for a group of 21 OECD countries for which comparable historical series are available. 2008 or latest available year et al.,  2008), leading to an average gain in life expectancy of about 1 years between 1990 and 2008. Differences in per capita spending are also the most important factor explaining differences in health status across countries. Nevertheless, the countries that spend the most are not necessarily the ones that fare best in terms of health outcomes, suggesting that there is room to improve the cost effectiveness of spending. As an illustration, Denmark spends slightly more than Sweden and Iceland on health care, but various health outcome indicators are below those of these two other Nordic countries, as illustrated by Denmark’s lower life expectancy at birth ( 2008 or latest available year et al., 2010). Good health may contribute more to well-being than to GDP simply because health care services tend to be poorly measured in the national accounts. Indeed, traditionally, the output of government-provided non-market services is measured on the basis of the inputs to produce these services, neglecting any productivity or quality changes in providing these services (Schreyer, 2010). Health may also affect well-being more than income because well-being encompasses dimensions such as social connections and relationships, which may deteriorate when people suffer from chronic or severe health problems. In a study covering 178 countries, White (2007) found that subjective well-being is highly correlated with health (as measured by life expectancy) across countries, ahead of factors such as wealth and access to basic education. Likewise, Layard (2003) argues that happiness is well correlated with many measures of physical health. In a study covering 16 European countries, Blanchflower and Oswald (2007) found that happier nations – as measured by the Eurobarometer life satisfaction scores – report lower levels of hypertension. e.g.  et al. et al. et al. et al. Reviewing the work of others and focusing mainly on developing countries, the World Health Organization Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (WHO, 2001) found that a 10% increase in life expectancy at birth is associated with a rise in GDP growth of at least 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points per year, holding other factors constant. The empirical evidence for developed economies is, however, much weaker than for developing countries (Acemoglu and Johnson, 2007; Bhargava et al., 2001; Hartwig, 2010). One possible explanation is that the increase in life expectancy in OECD countries has mainly benefitted the older, often retired population – almost half of the gain in life expectancy at birth in the OECD area since 1960 reflects the increase in life expectancy at 65. The impact of longevity on productivity, labour supply and economic growth is thus largely muted, while the cost for the public finances may be large, potentially dragging economic growth down. Life expectancy at birth could be raised by more than two years on average across the OECD – holding health care spending steady – if all countries were to become as efficient as the best performers. By way of comparison, a 10% increase in health care spending would increase life expectancy by only three to four months. The potential for efficiency gains varies widely across countries. Australia, Iceland, Japan, Korea and Switzerland perform best in transforming spending into health outcomes. Here the potential gains through greater efficiency are the smallest – less than one extra year of life expectancy ( ). Potential efficiency gains are the highest – over four extra years of life – in Denmark, Hungary, the Slovak Republic and the United States. For more than one-third of countries, improving efficiency could increase life expectancy as much in the 10 years to 2017 as in the previous 10 years (1997-2007), while keeping health care spending constant ( Improving efficiency would result in large public spending savings in most OECD countries. This has been calculated by comparing a no-reform scenario with a reform scenario. The no-reform scenario assumes that between 2007 and 2017 life expectancy and spending increase at the same pace as over the previous 10-year period and that the mix between public and private spending remains constant over time. The reform scenario assumes that countries exploit potential efficiency gains. This comparison suggests that potential public savings would amount to 1.9% of GDP on average in the OECD in 2017 ( There is no trade-off between achieving more equal health outcomes within countries and raising the average health status of the population. Indeed, the countries with the lowest health inequalities also tend to enjoy a high average health status – Iceland, Italy and Sweden are good examples. Internationally comparable data on health inequalities are scarce. A proxy measure of health inequalities can be the dispersion in the age of death among individuals (Edwards and Tuljapurkar, 2005; OECD, 2007). In 2006, this dispersion was lowest in Iceland, the Netherlands and Sweden. In those countries where the dispersion was the highest in 2006 (the United States followed by Hungary and Poland), the average health status of the population as measured by various indicators stood below the OECD median country. Life expectancy between 2007 and 2017 could increase at the same pace as over the previous 10 years, but at a much lower cost in most countries if estimated potential efficiency gains were to be exploited. Potential savings represent the difference between a no-reform scenario and a scenario where countries would exploit efficiency gains. The no-reform scenario assumes that between 2007 and 2017 life expectancy and spending increase at the same pace as over the previous 10 years and that the mix between public and private spending remains constant over time. To reap the potential efficiency gains, countries need to design reform strategies that cover all the policies and institutional features that matter for efficiency. These can be identified by comparing experiences across countries. However, consistent cross-country information on health policies and institutions had been missing until recently. To fill this void, the OECD used a questionnaire to collect detailed information on incentives and regulations affecting the behaviour of health care providers (hospitals and health practitioners), users and insurers, as well as other dimensions such as the degree of decentralisation in health care policies and the nature of the budget constraint. Twenty-nine OECD countries responded to the questionnaire, launched in 2008. et al. the questionnaire in great detail. This wide-ranging dataset (269 mainly qualitative variables) was transformed into 20 core indicators on health policies and institutions that take values ranging from 0 to 6. These core quantitative indicators are presented in OECD (2010). The basic insurance coverage – measured by population covered, services included and the degree of cost-sharing – is fairly similar across countries. Mexico, Turkey and the United States stand out as exceptions, with still a large share of the population not covered in 2009. In these three countries, however, policies aim at providing greater coverage. Some OECD countries rely heavily on centralised command-and-control systems to steer the demand and supply of health care services. In sharp contrast, market mechanisms – involving features such as private provision based on fee-for-services, competition among private providers driven by user choice and private insurance – play a dominant role in other countries. But more and more countries rely on a mix of the two extreme models. As an illustration, several countries which rely heavily on public providers and public coverage have recently given users greater choice of providers, stimulating competitive pressures among them ( e.g.  Sweden and the United Kingdom). Six groups of countries sharing broadly similar institutions – or health care systems – can be identified ( ). The degree of reliance on market mechanisms and regulations to steer the demand and supply of health care services – in particular the importance of private providers, how much choice among providers is offered to users, the existence and depth of the health insurance market as well as the stringency of gate-keeping arrangements – is key to characterise health care systems. These country groups are derived from a cluster analysis. The countries on the left, such as Germany and the Netherlands, tend to rely on market mechanisms to supply health care whereas those on the right, such as Finland and the United Kingdom, depend more on public command-and-control. Apparently diverse countries fit the same group: the rules in Iceland, Sweden and Turkey for instance all provide for ample user choice even if in practice there are geographical and other constraints. Note that the United States did not participate in the Survey. Linking performance scores and policy indicators should be done with care since reforms and increases in spending might require time to fully translate into better health outcomes. This applies to many countries including New Zealand and the United Kingdom. Group 1. In the four countries relying extensively on market mechanisms in providing insurance coverage, efficiency is close to the OECD average but there are large differences between countries. Switzerland is one of the most efficient countries; the performance of Germany and the Netherlands is close to the OECD average while the Slovak Republic is performing poorly. In interpreting these results it should, however, be borne in mind that not only are the efficiency estimates subject to some uncertainty but recent health care system reforms in Germany, the Netherlands and the Slovak Republic might not have had their full impact on efficiency yet. Group 3. This group is also characterised by an extensive use of market mechanisms at the provider level but no gate-keeping and little reliance on private insurance. It is split into two in terms of efficiency. The two Asian countries – Japan and Korea – are performing very well, whereas the results of the others are close to or below average. Group 6. Consisting of countries with heavily regulated public systems and a stringent budget constraint, performance within this group varies considerably. Italy, Norway, Poland and New Zealand have relatively efficient systems. Ireland and the United Kingdom are less efficient. Finally, Hungary has been performing poorly. Potential gains in life expectancy are derived from an output oriented DEA with per capita health care spending and a composite indicator of socio-economic environment and lifestyle factors as inputs for 2007. To facilitate the interpretation, the efficiency scores have been converted into potential gains in life expectancy, i.e.  ) are lowest in Iceland, the Netherlands and Sweden. They also tend to be low in countries relying most on private insurance for the basic coverage (Group 1), with the exception of the Slovak Republic. This probably reflects that Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland have introduced equalisation mechanisms and regulations to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of insurance markets on equity. Health inequalities, as measured by the dispersion in the age of death, are large in the United States where the reliance on private insurance is also very high. It should also be recognised that health inequalities are largely driven by socio‑economic factors and thus mainly determined outside the health care sector. ) tend to be high in countries relying extensively on market mechanisms in managing the basic insurance coverage (Group 1) and in countries where private health insurance plays an important role for providing additional coverage (Group 2). Administrative costs tend to be higher in those countries relying most on private insurance (Groups 1 and 2) ( ). At the other extreme, countries relying more on regulations and public providers tend to spend less on administration. Within some groups, however, differences in administrative costs are significant. In particular, the very large administrative costs – 7% or more of total health expenditure in 2007 – in Belgium, France, Luxembourg, Mexico and New Zealand may well signal inefficiencies. 2007 or latest available year 2006 or latest available year 2007 or latest available year 2007 or latest available year approach – switching from one type of system to another – may not necessarily improve efficiency much. Nevertheless, useful reform avenues can be derived from international benchmarking. , to identify how each country differs from its peers and whether policy levers exist to improve consistency in policy settings and thus efficiency. OECD (2010) presents a summary of this information in the form of individual country profiles and illustrates how to use this set of indicators for Finland and France. et al. , 2007). And co-ordination problems may increase with the fragmentation of key health care decisions across levels of government. This should be an area for investigation in Austria, Australia, Canada, Denmark, Italy, Mexico, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. e.g.  in the Czech Republic, Japan and Korea) or to contain spending on the in-patient sector ( e.g.  could be increased where they are low and combined with wide patient choice among providers since this may induce excessive demand, notably in the Czech Republic and Luxembourg. should be investigated in many countries, both in the in-patient and out-patient sector. In some of the countries where physicians are compensated mainly through fee-for-services, the level of activity is high compared with other countries. Introducing an element of capitation – whereby physicians are paid according to the number of registered patients and not on the number of times patients require the physician’s services – could help to reduce the number of consultations and improve the quality of preventive care (Germany, Japan and Korea are examples). In contrast, an activity-based component could be introduced or strengthened in some of the countries relying mainly on salaries ( e.g.  e.g.  Ireland and Poland) to increase the productivity of physicians. Adjusting the relative income level of health practitioners may be warranted in some countries – income tends to be low in some eastern European and Nordic countries. Combined with a stronger activity-based component of physicians’ compensation system, this would reduce incentives for informal payments ( e.g.  Hungary) and for health personnel to migrate to high wage countries. Likewise, for hospitals, introducing a payment per case system in countries where it is absent may improve efficiency in the in-patient sector – notably in Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, Portugal and Turkey. e.g.  e.g.  e.g.  the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence in the United Kingdom). While there is little evidence that establishing principles has significant effects on health care practice, priority-setting bodies with decision-making power seem to have been quite successful in some countries (Sabik and Lie, 2008). Within groups, the most efficient countries tend to be those with the most rigorous priority setting. Hence, better priority setting should be envisaged in those countries where there is no precise definition of the health benefit basket, no effective health technology assessment and no clear definition and monitoring of public health objectives. In the United Kingdom and the Slovak Republic, rigorous priority setting is not matched by a high level of efficiency. This may reflect fairly recent improvements in priority setting, which were undertaken as a response to unsatisfactory performance. in health status vary across countries, and depend both on the health care system and general socio-economic conditions. The factors behind health inequalities should be investigated further so that policies can be developed to improve equality. Mexico and Turkey should move further towards achieving universal coverage. It would also be useful to assess whether inequities in access, and hence inequalities in health status, are created by extensive reliance on private health insurance to cover those services not, or only partially, covered by the basic insurance package (Canada and France), and/or high out-of-pocket payments (Finland, Hungary, Poland and Slovak Republic). 