 was launched in 2005 as a new form of structural surveillance complementing the OECD's long­standing country and sector­specific surveys. In line with the OECD's 1960 founding Convention, the aim is to help promote vigorous sustainable economic growth and improve the well­being of OECD citizens. This surveillance is based on a systematic and in­depth analysis of structural policies and their outcomes across OECD members, relying on a set of internationally comparable and regularly updated policy indicators with a well­established link to performance. Using these indicators, alongside the expertise of OECD committees and staff, policy priorities and recommendations are derived for each member and, since the 2011 issue, six key non­member economies with which the OECD works closely (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and South Africa). From one issue to the next, In gauging performance, the focus is on GDP per capita, productivity and employment. As highlighted in the past and again in this issue, this leaves out some important dimensions of well­being. For this reason, regularly features thematic chapters dedicated to these other dimensions, and increasingly looks at the side effects of growth­enhancing priorities on other government policy objectives. Many countries have been actively reforming in recent years. The pick-up in the overall pace of reforms reported in last year’s issue has since been confirmed and action on policy priorities stands at its highest level since the onset of surveillance in 2005. This year’s issue shows that action in areas covered by OECD policy recommendations has been particularly intense among euro area countries that have been under financial assistance programmes or direct market pressures. Furthermore, reform efforts have reached politically-sensitive areas such as labour market regulation and social welfare systems. This has helped to shore up confidence and bring market relief in these countries and beyond. Recent declines in sovereign bond spreads owe much to measures taken by the European Central Bank in a context of stronger euro area governance. However, further reducing and keeping spreads at manageable levels will require continuing reform efforts, which are starting to pay-off as witnessed by improved competitiveness and export performance in some of the countries under market stress. In contrast, a far more moderate pace of reforms has been observed in other euro area countries, especially those with a current account surplus, as well as in countries enjoying particularly high living standards and the BRIICS (Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China and South Africa). Yet, to achieve stronger and more balanced growth, both in the euro area and globally, action on structural policy priorities needs to be pursued in both external deficit and surplus countries. One special feature of this report is to explore the effect of growth-oriented policy recommendations on current account imbalances. It shows that for some countries with large imbalances, acting on priorities can help to narrow them. analysis for each OECD country since 2005 and, more recently, for the BRIICS. This benchmarking exercise provides a tool for governments to reflect on policy reforms that affect their citizens’ long-term living standards. Chapter 1 first reviews progress that countries have made since 2011 to address the policy priorities identified in past issues of Chapter 2 examines the potential side effects of growth-enhancing policy recommendations on two other aspects of well-being – income distribution and the environment. It also explores the potential impact of the recommended reforms on internal (budgetary) and external (current account) imbalances. This is done with a view to describing the main channels of influence and identifying possible policy trade-offs and complementarities. The five policy priorities identified for each country are briefly summarised in individual country notes regrouped in Chapter 3. The selection of policy priorities is based to a large extent on a comprehensive set of quantitative indicators, presented in Chapter 4, which allow for a comparison of policy settings across countries. e.g.  e.g.  priorities, the most notable change is a marked increase in the share of priorities aimed at boosting employment for OECD countries, especially in the areas of social benefits and active labour market policies, reflecting the growing focus on dealing with the job market legacy of the post-crisis weak recovery and associated challenges of helping unemployed people returning to work. The stronger emphasis on active labour market and social benefit policies is largely consistent with countries’ own structural reform commitments and core priorities, as expressed in the context of the G20 action plans. e.g.  Growth-enhancing structural reforms have a direct, short-term impact on government budgets when their implementation requires additional public resources or – less frequently – entails initial expenditure cutbacks or revenue increases. In the longer term, the effect of structural reforms on the budget will differ mainly according to whether they boost growth through employment or productivity. In both cases, reforms generate higher tax revenues, but only in the case of employment are they likely to significantly improve the budget balance. Taking stock of reform action and identifying priorities in 2013  in the area of active labour market and training policies and regulatory barriers to entry in retail trade or professional services, would also help countries that have suffered a sharp increase in the unemployment rate and in the incidence of long-term unemployment.  in the areas of tax and benefit systems and job protection) are formulated with a view to reducing the heavy economic and social costs associated with informality. Structural reforms have gained momentum in the aftermath of the recent recession. This has been driven in part by market pressures in the context of the euro area crisis and by discussions and co­ordinated efforts in multilateral settings such as the G20. Structural reform commitments under the G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth cover – with some cross-country variations – many of the same policies as the 2011 reform priorities (OECD, 2012b). There is increasing awareness of the necessity to accompany macroeconomic stabilisation policies with structural reforms. Yet, given the weakness of near-term demand prospects, the limited scope for macro policies to further stimulate demand and the still less than fully functioning financial sector in many countries, there is a risk that the benefits from reform may take more time to materialise than in a normal conjuncture. Some of them may even depress short-term growth despite their beneficial long-term effects (see Chapter 4 of reports have been published by the OECD every year since 2005. The analysis identifies five structural reform priorities to boost real income for each OECD country, for the European Union as a whole, and starting with the 2011 edition, the BRIICS – Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and South Africa – key non-member countries with which the OECD works closely. Policy recommendations are identified based on their ability to improve long-term material living standards through higher productivity and labour utilisation and broadly cover the areas of product and labour market regulations, human capital, tax and benefits systems and innovation policies. Financial market regulation does not generally feature prominently among country-specific priorities, owing to the particular need for strong international co­ordination in this area (see OECD, 2011a, 2012a). Even though policy priorities are established with a view to foster long-term economy-wide gains in living standards, some of them may also help addressing other objectives. For instance, some structural reforms can help to tackle global and intra-euro area macroeconomic imbalances, or ease concerns about growing inequality, as discussed in Chapter 2 of this report. This chapter first provides a broad assessment of the progress that countries have made in structural reform priorities identified in 2011–  in the last priority-setting exercise. It then looks briefly at variations in labour productivity and labour use across OECD and BRIICS countries, in order to understand the relative areas of performance weaknesses by country. Against this background, it finally discusses the general orientation and focus of the policy recommendations that result from mapping performance weaknesses to policy deficiencies for each individual country. take a value of one if ’’significant’’ action is taken and zero if not. Given that a single priority may entail more than one specific recommendation, the scoring is often based on more than one reform opportunity per priority area. For more details see Box 2.2 and Annex 2.A1 in Overall, reform patterns show that the weak post-crisis recovery and, especially, the euro area debt turmoil, continue to act as catalysts for structural reforms in OECD countries, reinforcing the findings from last year’s edition (OECD, 2012a). Following an initial slowdown in the early stage of the recession (2008-10), there has been a substantial pickup in reform intensity on average across the OECD, with responsiveness reaching its highest rate since 2005 ( ), reflecting an increase in response to both labour productivity and labour utilisation – enhancing priorities. Specifically, the correlation coefficient between the 2011-12 responsiveness rate and trough-to-peak variation in yields on 10 year government bonds (computed based on quarterly averages constructed from daily data over the period 1Q2011-2Q2012), is equal to 0.6 and significant at the 1% level. Bond yield data are available for 21 countries only.  Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain), are among the OECD countries whose responsiveness was highest ( , Panel A), and also where it increased most compared with the previous period ( , Panel B). Accession to the Euro area in 2011 – in concomitance with a steep recession – may have acted as reform catalyst for Estonia, who also ranks among the most responsive countries.  labour market regulation and social welfare systems. e.g.   Luxembourg, Norway, Switzerland and United States) have shown moderate appetite for reform, although there has been a slight acceleration more recently in the United States ( , Panel B). Among the low-income OECD and BRIICS countries, where the necessity of structural reforms to achieve higher living standards is in principle the highest, reform intensity has varied: Central European countries (Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovak Republic), whose income gap with respect to the upper-half of OECD countries remains above 50%, have showed fairly good reform responsiveness. Progress has been more limited in Chile, Mexico and Turkey, but Mexico has of late experienced acceleration in reform action.  France and Spain, where this resulted in the removal of the corresponding policy priority. Labour taxation reforms have also been going on for some time now, first in response to the surge in unemployment, by  introducing targeted reductions in social security contributions, and several countries have subsequently done so in the context of fiscal consolidation reform packages, notably by cutting labour taxes while raising taxes on consumption, property or the environment. Reforms to boost job creation and take-up have been more intense in some policy areas These findings are broadly in line with recent analysis by the European Commission (EC). See Chapter 1, Part II in EC (2012).  the existence of separate segments where comparable workers enjoy differential wage conditions and job protection. Such policy priorities have become even more topical in countries where the crisis highlighted major need for reallocation, for instance following downsizing of certain sectors,  construction. ). Progress has been notable but legislated changes were often less ambitious than initial announcements, reflecting their unpopularity and associated civil and political opposition. Further reforms in these areas are still needed and are therefore generally retained as 2013  et al. and excessive hardship. At the same time, too generous and long-lasting benefits could prevent the return to work once the labour market recovers, requiring renewed policy focus as economic activity picks-up – at which point, though, political economy mechanisms may weaken reform opportunities. Perhaps surprisingly in view of this situation, no country opted to introduce state-contingent elements in its unemployment insurance (see below). As found in last year’s edition (OECD, 2012a), reform responsiveness has been higher on labour productivity than labour utilisation priorities in both OECD and BRIICS countries (  Greece, Italy and Portugal) but also in Australia, Canada and Japan. Reform action mostly reflects the implementation of revenue-increasing and growth-friendly tax measures,  a shift from labour to consumption, immovable property or environmental taxation (see section above).  through liberalisation of retail trade or liberal professions, as well as more broadly measures to spur competitive pressure, encourage investment and firm growth. Despite the progress achieved, actions taken in this area have rarely implied the removal of the corresponding policy priority in 2013, because major obstacles to competition remain, notably in non-tradable services but also in energy markets. Furthermore, while important actions have been achieved in a number of external deficit countries,  Greece, Ireland, Italy and Portugal, much less has been achieved in external surplus countries where product market liberalisation is a major policy priority and could not only spur growth but also contribute to reducing current account imbalances,  Germany, Japan and Korea. Short-term imperatives have not constrained OECD countries’ commitments to policy reform with longer-time payoffs, and reform intensity has been quite high in the area of education. Despite widespread reforms across OECD countries, corresponding priorities were not removed in 2013, since education is a fundamental driver of long-term growth and an area requiring pursued efforts over an extended period of time. By contrast, less has been achieved on agriculture and energy subsidies, confirming the political economy obstacles to reform in these areas. and Annex 1A.1). The associated country-specific recommendations are detailed in separate country notes (Chapter 3). The section begins with a brief overview of how countries rank in terms of GDP per capita and to what extent the differences in living standards can be attributed to gaps in productivity or labour utilisation. This is followed by a brief snapshot of changes in policy priorities between 2013 and 2011. The final section discusses policy priorities to enhance labour utilisation, and then those aimed at boosting labour productivity. While the dual classification of reform priorities based on their potential to raise either labour utilisation or labour productivity allows a simple and transparent assessment, it is important to keep in mind that a number of structural reforms are beneficial on  job protection and product market reforms, see is progressively integrating additional aspects of well being. As a starting point to this process, Chapter 2 covers the side effects of structural reform priorities on income distribution and the environment. Chapter 2 also examines the side effects of structural reform priorities on current account and fiscal imbalances. Five policy priorities are identified for each country across the OECD and the BRIICS. In each case, at least three of the priorities are selected on the basis of quantitative performance and policy indicators, in areas where performance and policy weaknesses coincide. The remaining two priorities are identified using a combination of indicators, where available, and country-specific expertise (see Annex 1.A1 for a description of the process for identifying policy priorities). This is to ensure that important policy priorities in areas that are not covered by indicators are not left out. Since the set of available performance and policy indicators remains more limited for non-member countries, there is a greater reliance on country expertise for these countries.  in the areas of product market regulation and job protection. , Panel A). Cross-country patterns have remained quite stable despite the depth of the crisis (  The decomposition reveals different groups of countries: Large differences in income per capita are mostly accounted for by productivity gaps for employment data on Brazil and Indonesia; Statistics South Africa for employment data on South Africa; India National Sample Survey (various years), annual population estimates from the Registrar General and OECD estimates for employment data on India; China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security for employment data on China. (Luxembourg, Norway, Switzerland and the United States in particular) and the dozen or so countries  Belgium, France, Germany, Ireland and the Netherlands), relatively low labour utilisation is offset by high productivity  Boulhol, 2009). while the opposite pattern is generally seen for countries outside Europe such as Australia, Canada, Japan, Korea and New Zealand. Nordic countries (other than Norway) as well as Austria and the United Kingdom have close to average levels of labour utilisation but lag behind the best performers in terms of productivity. , Panel B). Among the BRIICS, labour resource under-utilisation is also a major challenge in India and, especially, South Africa. In contrast, labour utilisation in China is high even compared with most advanced OECD countries. South Africa is an exception though, combining relatively high informality with relatively low employment. and a number of lower-income OECD countries. Although the extent of informality is difficult to measure, available data suggest that informal economic activities are particularly widespread in India and Indonesia and to a lesser, albeit still sizeable, extent in Brazil, Chile, Mexico, South Africa and Turkey ( et al. e.g.  through easing administrative barriers to the formalisation of firms, simplifying the tax system, improving revenue collection procedures, increasing the coverage of social protection systems and relaxing overly strict job protection for formal workers (see below and Country notes in Chapter 3). Data refer to 2010 for the Russian Federation and South Africa and to 2005 for India. ). Indeed, the crisis has raised unemployment and the risk that it turns structural, hence some refocusing of priorities towards active labour market and social benefit policies aimed at softening the impact of unemployment while avoiding that it becomes entrenched. Otherwise, despite growing reform action among OECD countries as mentioned above, the vast majority of 2011 priorities are retained. Roughly comparable reform priorities emerge from a concomitant survey carried over the same period by the Business and Industry Advisory Committee to the OECD (BIAC) in its Member and Observer organisations – i.e.  the major national business and employer organisations in OECD countries and certain emerging economies. The survey included the assessment of businesses’ perceptions of structural policy priorities in their country. There is a large degree of correspondence between BIAC’s reported priorities and the than in business and employers’ organisations perceived priorities, with the latter being largely oriented towards boosting productivity through  product market reforms. action on policy recommendations – as defined and reflected in the reform responsiveness rate indicator presented above – has not implied the removal of the corresponding priority ( The sum of upper-income and lower-income OECD countries’ priorities for doesn’t add up to 175 because the EU as a whole is not counted among any of these two groups. The most frequent change in priorities is rather a narrowing or broadening of their scope to better reflect partial progress already made and shifts in country-specific circumstances that led to an update or reformulation of the associated policy challenges – again often dictated by the crisis context and in particular its labour market and budgetary implications. In the case of four countries (Italy, Japan, Mexico and the United States) two separate 2011 priorities in closely-related policy areas have been The distribution of priorities has remained remarkably stable for the BRIICS. This pattern reflects the magnitude of performance and policy gaps with respect to OECD countries, which implies that comparatively stronger action – presumably staggered over an extended period of time – is needed to justify the removal of a policy priority. To some extent, this stability also reflects the relatively mild impact of the crisis on BRIICS’s labour markets compared with those of OECD countries. The bulk of priorities are aimed at improving productivity (80%, see , Panel A, and OECD, 2012c): , Panel B), which has risen dramatically for such groups, particularly in Greece, Italy, the Slovak Republic, Spain and the United States. The risk of seeing a rising share of workers losing attachment to the labour market has also showed up in the form of increased dropping-out from the labour force, which was particularly pronounced in Estonia, Ireland, Spain and the United States. Of mounting concern is the rise in the number of young persons who are neither in employment nor in education or training, the so-called in Chapter 1 of OECD, 2012c). , Panel B and   well-designed active labour market policies could reduce unemployment persistence and encourage the return to work while increasing the responsiveness of wages to labour market pressures would encourage rebalancing and euro area real exchange rate adjustment. More generally, addressing these concerns calls for action in several policy domains, spanning taxation, social benefits and activation policies, labour market regulation and wage bargaining arrangements. High average and – in particular – marginal taxes on labour incomes can reduce workforce participation and raise unemployment, especially for workers with low incomes. Despite some action taken on nearly 40% of previous priorities in this area, lowering such taxes (including through cuts in social security contributions) is a priority for more than half of OECD countries (  low earners and second earners or lone parents.  in France and Spain reforms have included increases in retirement age and in contribution periods required for a full pension. Still, given that less severe recessions have in the past led to significant labour market withdrawal with a notable lag (Duval et al. ). In the short run, reforms in this area may help ensure that laid-off older workers remain attached to the labour market. Over the longer term, such reforms will allow raising older workers’ participation rates, which are currently very low in some countries ( ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ links between pensions and life expectancy are now in place in at least 20 of the 34 OECD countries. However, countries have overwhelmingly chosen to link benefit levels to life expectancy rather than pension ages – as only five of them have life-expectancy links in their mandatory pension system. On balance, a link between pension age and life expectancy, rather than benefit levels is a preferable option (see Chapter 5 in OECD, 2011d). Indeed, benefit cuts may push low-income retirees onto social assistance and other safety-net programmes, at the risk of offsetting some or all the savings achieved through linking public-pension benefits to life expectancy. It will also put additional burden on private defined contribution plans. Linking both pension ages and benefits with life expectancy is, however, a potentially attractive option to ensure financial stability, improved incentives to working longer and income adequacy at older ages (see OECD, 2011d). Likewise, a tightening of some early exit routes from the labour market risks triggering an increase in the use of others. In particular, disability and sickness benefits are needed to ensure appropriate incomes to individuals whose health status temporarily or permanently prevents them from working or searching for jobs, but these schemes are sometimes misused and poorly targeted. Moreover, persistently high unemployment is adding renewed pressure on systems that do not enforce strict health criteria for eligibility and are insufficiently monitored. Better monitoring of eligibility for and tightening of access to disability schemes are identified as priorities for Austria, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland and the United States – in the latter country enhanced workplace accommodation and rehabilitation services are also necessary. More frequent reviews of individual work capacity are a priority in the Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom. Denmark is being recommended to closely monitor the effects of the et al. and the United States provide recent examples of adjusting the UB programme parameters in response to changing labour market conditions. For example, in the United States, under the extended benefits programme, some states have laws that automatically extend the unemployment insurance benefit duration when the unemployment rate is above a certain level (OECD, 2011c). Similarly to state-contingent unemployment benefit duration, short-time working schemes (STW) may provide a useful buffer that can be activated depending on the economic situation and several OECD countries have introduced STW schemes as a response to the 2008 crisis. Although an empirical assessment of the long-term effects of STW schemes is not yet available, the crisis experience – and in particular the German example – suggests that having such options in place and being able to activate them in severe downturns can be useful, insofar as they may avoid losses of specific human capital in the wake of shocks that are temporary and do not imply a need for reallocation (Hijzen and Venn, 2011). By contrast, when shocks imply a need for reallocation across sectors, STW schemes may hinder labour reallocation and thus limit employment variability over the cycle at the expense of productivity in the long run.  of deadweight losses and displacement effects (see OECD, 2012a).  associated with employment and contribution records and sanctions for voluntary unemployment).  in Chile, Indonesia and Turkey). China is advised to reduce barriers to mobility and enable internal labour reallocation,  by enhanced provision of social rights and public services to migrants. OECD countries have been increasingly endorsing the need to develop sound active labour market policies (ALMP) to strengthen jobseekers’ attachment to the labour market and, in association with well-designed unemployment benefit systems, encourage the return to work. In the wake of the crisis, more than two-thirds of OECD countries boosted resources for job-search assistance and training programmes in order to facilitate re-employment and re-deployment (OECD, 2012a). The weak and uneven recovery in many OECD countries raises the importance of using these resources most effectively so as to facilitate the return to work and reduce the risk that the cyclical increase in unemployment becomes structural (  countries that have experienced construction and housing bubble bursts (  Ireland, Spain and the United States) and where policies should focus on addressing skill mismatches by encouraging requalification; and  countries that are experiencing a pronounced and persistent surge in unemployment, especially among youth (  Greece and Italy), and which should focus on preventing discouragement effects. All these countries also feature either a sharp rise in long-term unemployment, in the estimated structural unemployment, or in the proportion of NEET (see above). Stepping-up the level and efficiency of ALMPs is reiterated for Belgium, Estonia, Finland, France, Ireland, Israel, Luxembourg, the Slovak Republic and South Africa (  in France, Italy, Spain and Portugal). et al. et al., et al., et al., Despite progress achieved in this area over the last two years – in particular in European countries affected by the sovereign debt crisis (c.f. OECD, 2012a, and above) – further reforms to rebalance job protection between permanent and temporary contracts are needed in France, Germany, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia, and Sweden. In Italy, the parliament has recently approved an important labour market reform which should help reduce duality and priority must now be given to reducing judicial delays in labour settlements, a recommendation also advanced for Mexico and Portugal. Job protection reforms are also encouraged in emerging economies (India, Indonesia, Mexico and Turkey) to tackle the problem of informality which can be considered as an extreme form of duality.  Barthélémy et al. et al. convergence, under which unpredictable dismissal costs for employers are converted into a system of individual savings accounts, funded from a set of employers’ contributions from the first day of employment until contract termination. This separation allowance can be cumulated by the employee over an entire working life, and does not harm job mobility given that workers do not lose their entitlements to severance payments when quitting to take a new job. One of the key advantages of the system – which can be thought of as a form of mandatory savings – is to offer workers severance payments that rise gradually with tenure while reducing uncertainty as regards dismissal costs faced by employers.  Hofer et al.  differentiated rates across regions or between youth and prime-age workers), a statutory minimum wage can encourage the labour force participation of low-skilled workers, especially if combined with in-work benefits. However, overly high minimum labour costs, which can result from a combination of legal minimum wages and labour taxes, can limit the jobs available for young workers and the low-skilled. median wages are recommended as a means to encourage low-skilled and formal employment in both some OECD and large emerging-market countries where the minimum wage appears to weigh on (formal) employment (France, Indonesia, Israel, Slovenia and Turkey). In South Africa priority should be given to introducing age-differentiated minimum wages in sectors where these are not set by collective bargaining. The cost of labour can also be driven to levels that are detrimental to employment by collective wage agreements that in some countries are administratively extended to workers and employers who are not party to the original negotiations and settlements (and who may sometimes be in different sectors and regions). Reforms in this area are being recommended for Belgium, Portugal, Slovenia, South Africa and Spain in order to better align wages with productivity conditions at aggregate, regional, firm and skill-specific levels. structural unemployment, especially in the current recovery context where reallocation of labour across different sectors and regions is needed in a number of OECD countries. Overly stringent planning and zoning can raise house price levels and volatility, and thereby contribute to financial and economic instability as well as undermine competition and productivity in certain sectors such as retail trade (see special Chapter 4 in 2011; OECD, 2011a). Housing policies and rent regulation need to be revised in Denmark, Israel, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Slovak Republic, Sweden and the United Kingdom. The likely permanent GDP loss from the 2008-09 recession – estimated at some 3% for the OECD on average (OECD, 2009) – is driven by lower potential employment, but also by lower capital accumulation resulting from the long-lasting elevation of risk and the cost of capital usually observed in the aftermath of a financial crisis. This in turn may hamper investment in both tangible and intangible assets – including innovation activity – hence ultimately productivity. OECD estimates (OECD, 2009) suggested that two-thirds of the OECD-wide decrease in potential output came from a permanently higher cost of capital with the remainder coming from lower potential employment. See also a recent McKinsey Global Institute report, where it is argued that behind Europe’s growth stagnation is an unprecedented weakness in private investment which should be unlocked by removing regulatory barriers  in energy and network industries (McKinsey Global Institute, 2012).  on G20 trade and investment measures (OECD, WTO OMC and UNCTAD, 2012) and Global Trade Alert (GTA) on protectionism (GTA, 2012).  by shifting resources away from inefficient sectors towards more productive ones. Such transition is by nature protracted, but public policies can help accelerate the reallocation and set the conditions for faster medium-term growth with reforms in the areas of product market regulation, general taxation as well as the efficient provision of public services and infrastructure. Achieving the highest degree of efficiency in the delivery of public services is all the more important in the current budgetary environment. e.g.  Greece, Japan, Mexico and New Zealand. Among the BRIICS, convergence has been strongest for China, India and Russia, while it has been weakest for Brazil and South Africa. As noted already, despite the progress achieved, productivity levels in the BRIICS remain far below OECD average and explain the bulk of their income gap  Barone and Cingano (2011); Bourlès et al. et al.  (2006); Bas and Causa (2012). Product market regulation can also affect aggregate productivity through its impact on the capacity of the economy to allocate capital and labour resources to fast-growing sectors. Estimates of the potential impacts of product market reform point to a strong pay-off, with the long-term gains in living standards realised relatively rapidly (see Bourlès et al. et al. Moreover, a number of such reforms are targeted at network and infrastructure sectors where lower-income countries face substantial shortages. Such recommendations are therefore often formulated in association with increases in infrastructure provision. Despite encouraging progress over the recent period (see above), product market reforms remain a priority for many OECD countries – in particular in Europe. At the current juncture they could facilitate adjustments in unit labour costs and the reallocation of resources across firms, as well as boost short-term growth and jobs creation (see Bouis et al. core and non-core countries. Product market reforms – in particular encouraging competition in non-tradable sectors – are also needed in euro area core countries, where appetite for reform has stalled over recent years.  by lifting barriers to firm entry and exit, improving the transparency of regulation and strengthening competition frameworks. Reducing the scope of public ownership is specifically advocated for some countries where state intervention is particularly widespread, with evidence that this hurts efficiency. Not only economy-wide but also sector-specific administrative burdens are still a problem in many countries, and most countries are advised to further reduce sector-specific barriers to competition,  in network industries, retail trade and professional services. Evidence suggests that aside from the boost to productivity, reducing barriers to entry in the latter sectors can generate fairly rapid employment gains (OECD, 2012a). Finally, in a more limited number of OECD and BRIICS countries, barriers to foreign investment and international trade remain stringent and may hamper catch-up and productivity growth. Recommendations in this area cover both specific sectors where restrictions are a particular concern or more broadly the transparency of screening procedures. ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ e.g.  et al. e.g.  Vocational Education and Training (VET) that effectively enhance employment prospects among youth and the low skilled. Education has been an area of fairly active reform over the past few years, but changes have often been incremental, reflecting perhaps the high cost and uncertainty of comprehensive reforms. And, the costs of some education reforms can be a major concern at a time of fiscal consolidation. However, cost efficiencies can be achieved within many countries’ education systems while maintaining, or even raising, output levels as discussed in the 2011 edition of ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ e.g.   by introducing or raising tuition charges and, in order to alleviate their adverse effects on enrolment, combining these with income-contingent payback. et al. Tax reforms have gained a prominent role on countries’ policy agenda (see above). This reflects in part the pressing need to restore fiscal sustainability in many OECD countries, which calls for designing growth-friendly fiscal consolidation strategies – or for implementing revenue-neutral tax reforms where there is fiscal space. There is mounting evidence of the impact of the tax structure on economic growth, through effects not only on labour utilisation (discussed above) but also private investment and productivity (see,  Arnold et al. et al. , 2012). Hence policy recommendations to improve the tax structure often include reductions in labour (see above), or corporate (Australia, Canada, Japan and the United States) income taxation. Policies to combat tax evasion as well as to broaden the tax base are advocated in several countries (Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Finland, France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Turkey and the United States) as a way to reduce distortions while enhancing revenues. Reforms in this area would also have beneficial equity effects, as discussed in Chapter 2. Depending on countries’ situation, it is not necessarily being recommended to increase the three taxes at the same time, see country notes (Chapter 3). (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Korea, Netherlands, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States). –  e reduction in employers’’ social security contributions financed by increased VAT – on net exports. However, this favourable trade effect is found to disappear in the long run as wages adjust to lower social security contributions. The scope for such reforms may be limited in some cases, as they may increase inequality, implying the need to cautiously address associated policy trade-offs (see Chapter 2). Some countries are also recommended to reduce distortions or fragmentation in their taxation systems (  Norway and the United States) by aligning the taxation of different asset classes and in particular by reducing the implicit tax subsidy for owner-occupied housing, or by introducing an integrated nationwide value-added tax (VAT) system for domestic goods while reducing the labour tax wedge (Brazil). Reforms to improve the efficiency of government expenditure are expected to boost productivity performance in the long term. But they are also particularly attractive at a time of fiscal consolidation, which probably explains why they have been gaining momentum over the recent period (see above). Recommendations include rationalisation of local government (Hungary), improved monitoring mechanisms of public sector performance (Hungary, United Kingdom), for instance by introducing performance assessment (Greece and Iceland) and benchmarking (Finland), the development of e-services (Czech Republic) and increased transparency and competition in public procurement (Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark and the European Union). A number of public sector recommendations focus on the healthcare sector, given the considerable scope to increase cost-efficiency in a number of countries (OECD, 2011a). Reforms in this area cover the reinforcement of competition among healthcare providers (United Kingdom), the promotion of incentives to reduce administration and procurement costs (New Zealand) and moving from mixed to insurer-based hospital funding (Switzerland). The United States is being recommended to ensure that that the provisions of the Affordable Care Act aimed at increasing health insurance coverage and achieving cost savings are effectively implemented and their impact monitored. Major healthcare sector reforms are needed in Russia to improve its very weak outcomes, especially among the poor; beyond focusing on prevention efforts to change lifestyles, policy recommendations include increased funding and associated higher wages for medical professionals, but also the introduction of cost-sharing mechanisms and a shift from hospital to primary care.  in the area of education, infrastructure and product market regulations, The OECD’s Innovation Strategy has highlighted the importance of a broad range of education, regulatory, infrastructure and other policies that can help strengthen innovation systems, potentially durably enhancing productivity growth (OECD, 2010c). See also  reforms of specific innovation policies – including public support measures – could help raise business expenditure on R&amp;D in countries where it is relatively low ( ). Specific recommendations are made to increase R&amp;D tax incentives (New Zealand and Russia) or to reform their design  by assessing them on changes instead of levels of activity (Ireland); to improve targeting of government support with a view to encourage firm growth through economies of scale (Canada), to foster export performance and energy savings (Estonia); to regularly assess the effectiveness of publicly funded projects (Czech Republic and New Zealand) and to take a balanced approach to supporting high- and low-technology sectors (Russia); to make greater use of competitive funding for research (Czech Republic and Russia) and improve access to venture capital (Slovak Republic). Successful innovation requires a strong human capital base, not least in science and engineering. Hence, priorities in this area often include strengthening collaboration between research institutes/universities and industry (Australia, Czech Republic, Ireland, New Zealand, Russia and the Slovak Republic). 2010 or last available year. 2007 for Greece and Mexico; 2008 for Chile, Iceland, South Africa and Switzerland; 2009 for Australia, New Zealand and the United States; 2011 for Canada, Germany and Italy. Very little progress has occurred towards reducing agricultural subsidies, which explains why priorities in this area are renewed for Japan, Iceland, Korea, Norway, Switzerland, Turkey and the United States, who all need to further reduce the level of producer support and to de-link it from production (especially Japan and Korea) to mitigate its adverse effects on the efficiency of resource allocation. Similar recommendations are made for the European Union, in association with a reduction in barriers to market access for non-EU countries and of biofuel subsidies. Similarly to agricultural support, energy subsidies are sometimes used as social policy devices, but they distort markets and waste resources that could be more effectively targeted directly at the poor – such as through cash transfers – or at growth-promoting spending. : Enhancing the capacity of infrastructure – primarily transport systems – is a priority in some member countries, and this requires sparing infrastructure investment from expenditure cuts in the United Kingdom, expanding user and congestion charges in Australia and New Zealand and enhancing transport and communication infrastructure in Poland. Infrastructure provision levels are still low in many non-member countries, and an increase in investment is recommended in Brazil, India and Indonesia. While raising public investment is important, a reform of the regulatory environment for infrastructure would help to attract private investment and optimise use,  by streamlining land acquisition processes (India), ensuring regulatory bodies’ independence and accountability (Indonesia) and promoting more private-sector participation in infrastructure through more public-private partnerships and concessions (Brazil). country-specific priorities, owing to the particular need for strong international co­ordination in this area. There are nonetheless specific idiosyncratic cases where financial reform priorities feature in . The European Union has achieved considerable progress in the area of financial services, not least with the increasing integration of supervision as proposed by the Council of EU finance ministers. Still, further reforms to make the system more stable and integrated are needed,  ensuring robust regulatory requirements, and continuing progress towards adopting a consistent set of rules, common supervisory practices covering all banks, and an EU-wide deposit insurance scheme while establishing bank resolution mechanisms based on common financing.  for Mexico to strengthen the  for the former, labour market outcomes of specific groups such as youth, women and older workers and, for the latter, multifactor productivity growth or investment in information and communications technology) so as to uncover specific areas of relative strength and weakness for individual countries. Each performance indicator is juxtaposed with corresponding policy indicators, where empirical research has shown a robust link to performance, to determine where performance and policy weaknesses appear to be linked.  Bourlès et al. et al.  Bassanini and Duval (2006) and Jaumotte (2004). This evaluation process is carried out for each of the approximately 50 areas where OECD policy indicators provide coverage. Since many of the policy indicators are associated with more than one performance area, there are more than 100 potential pairings examined, against a benchmark of the OECD average in given policy and performance areas. below shows, for a sample country, a scatter plot of pairings of policy indicators (on the horizontal axis) with corresponding performance indicators (on the vertical axis). The indicators are standardised by re-scaling them so that each has a mean of zero and a cross-country standard deviation of one, with positive numbers representing positions more growth-friendly than the OECD average. The scatter plot is thus divided into four quadrants, depending on whether a country’s policy-performance pairing is below or above the average policy or performance score. below the OECD average. In most countries there are more than three unique policy areas that qualify as potential priorities (for instance, Australia had 14 candidate priorities in 2013). Given the overall limit of five in the number of priorities per country, a selection is required. The policy priorities list is narrowed based on:  country expertise;  the normalised distance of the policy stance from the benchmark (the OECD average), and  recent trends in policy and performance. Hence the priority selection process is mainly done with a focus on maximizing long-run level of GDP per capita, but consideration is also given to the current macroeconomic situation – in particular budgetary constraints – which could for example imply that certain ’costly’ policy priorities may need to be phased in or postponed against a more urgent need to restore healthy public finances. et al. et al.  Bouis et al. Arnold, J., G. Nicoletti and S. Scarpetta (2008),  , No. 616, OECD Publishing. Arnold, J., et al. Vol. 121, pp. 59-80. , No. 990, OECD Publishing. Bassanini, A. and R. Duval (2006), , No. 486, OECD Publishing. Bouis, R., R. Duval and F. Murtin (2011),  , No. 843, OECD Publishing. Bourlès, R., et al. Do Product Market Regulations in Upstream Sectors Curb Productivity Growth? Panel Data Evidence for OECD Countries , No. 791, OECD Publishing. et al. No. 949, OECD Publishing. No. 370, OECD Publishing. Jaumotte, F. (2004),  , Vol. 2003/2, OECD Publishing. , Vol. 54, pp. 5-42. The effects of growth-enhancing structural reforms on other policy objectives This chapter examines the potential side effects of the growth-enhancing policy recommendations reviewed in Chapter 1 on two other aspects of well-being, namely income distribution and the environment, as well as on government budget balances and current accounts. In doing so, the chapter describes the main channels of influence and identify possible policy trade-offs and complementarities. In several cases, the full impact of policy recommendations on income inequality is difficult to assess with a great deal of confidence. This is because the net impact of many structural reforms results from multiple offsetting effects, but also because recommended reforms often do not cause substantial shifts in countries’ income distribution. Growth-enhancing policies will weaken the current account to the extent they contribute to reduce saving or raise investment. This is the case of policies that reduce barriers to investment (including foreign direct investments [FDI]), or that reduce private incentives to save, such as extending the coverage and level of social protection. The previous chapter has provided an overview of the structural reform priorities to achieve higher levels and growth in GDP per capita (see also individual country notes in Chapter 3). The purpose of this chapter is to examine the potential side effects of these recommendations on other objectives of public policy such as reducing income inequality, achieving environmental sustainability and unwinding macro-economic imbalances, with a view to identifying possible trade-offs and complementarities. Highlights of this work includes the 2011 report For a revision of the limitations of GDP to gauge material living standards and well-being see also Chapter 6 of the 2006 edition of (Annex 1 of OECD, 2011e). See also Jones and Klenow (2010) for a summary statistic for nations’ flow of welfare. At the same time, the recent crisis exposed the contributing role of large macroeconomic imbalances – both within and between countries – to the severity of the recession and the weakness of the recovery. External (current account) and internal (fiscal position) imbalances partly reflect side effects of structural policies that have consequences on the budget, competitiveness and saving and investment decisions. On income inequality see Chapter 5 of et al. (2010) and OECD (2008b); on fiscal and current account balances see Chapter 1 and Chapter 5 of et al. The chapter is organised as follows. The next section looks at the side effects of growth-enhancing measures on income distribution and the environment. The subsequent section looks at the potential impact of priorities and recommendations on macro-economic imbalances, more specifically budget deficits and current account positions. The assessment only covers those structural policies where a clear assessment of trade-offs and complementarities can be drawn, recognising that theoretical and empirical knowledge is still limited in some potentially important areas of reform. Each section provides a summary of the extent to which the 2013 policy recommendations help with respect to the additional policy objective and where they create tensions. Income inequality is measured by the Gini coefficient based on equivalised household disposable income, after taxes and transfers for total population. Data refer to 1994/95 for Australia, to 1996 for Chile, to 1992 for Czech Republic, to 1991 for Hungary and to early 1990s for the BRIICS. For BRIICS countries, income inequality is measured by the Gini coefficient based on per capita income, except for India and Indonesia for which the Gini coefficient is based on per capita consumption. Hence the data are not strictly comparable. i)   the employment rate of the working-age population. A number of policy recommendations to boost growth have opposing income distribution effects i.e.  These difficulties notwithstanding, an attempt to assess the redistributive impact of in-kind transfers can be found in Chapter 9 of OECD (2011a). et al. e.g.  Foster female labour market participation (by expanding childcare, reforming taxation…). Increase in senior employment which depends crucially on senior citizens’ ability to find work and hold on to their jobs. Possible increase in wage dispersion. et al. Given that such a policy may also strengthen the attachment to the labour market of individuals at higher risk of being unemployed – improving thereby their human capital development and career progression – the effect on inequality may not be so clear from a life-time perspective. et al. : The impact of reforming wage-setting agreements on income inequality is ambiguous. For instance, reducing legal extensions of collective wage agreements (as recommended for Belgium, Portugal, Spain and South Africa) can reduce labour costs and therefore stimulate employment, especially among low-paid workers. On the other hand, the reduction in the scope of collective agreements may contribute to widen the wage distribution, raising inequality among those having a job. This outcome hinges on older workers being employed – with an increased inflow to early retirement schemes or eventual higher unemployment likely to lower their pension replacement rates, which will in turn increase income dispersion. ). Duality in labour markets disproportionately affects low-wage earners. Workers on temporary contracts typically earn less than workers with similar characteristics on permanent contracts and this gap is particularly high for low-income earners (Fournier and Koske, 2012). At the same time, there is little evidence to suggest that promoting the use of temporary contracts yields sustainably higher employment levels: when employment protection is much stronger for regular than temporary contracts, workers employed under the latter – such as young people – risk getting trapped in a situation where they move between temporary work and unemployment, without getting fully integrated in the labour market. This can have adverse implications for human capital and career progression (OECD, 2004) and ultimately for both income equality and economic growth. In this case, policy reforms that reduce differences in job protection between regular and temporary workers lower inequality through smaller wage dispersion and possibly also et al. ). Active labour market policy reforms can help to reduce income inequality by raising job seekers’ employment chances and their wages once in employment as a result of job-search support, monitoring and skills upgrade Women’s shorter working hours partly reflect that they assume more caring obligations for children and elderly relatives than men (OECD, 2011b) which in turn plays an important role in explaining differences in the earnings gap. Hence, policies to increase women’s labour market participation can contribute to narrow the earnings gap between men and women. Other recommendations to encourage female labour market participation include reforming the tax and benefit system (Germany, Japan) and making childcare support provisions more dependent on second earners’ income rather than family income (Netherlands). See Chapter 1 of the 2011 edition of ) a composition effect, whereby a rise in the share of highly-educated (high-wage) workers raises earnings inequality up to a certain point, but will then lower it as fewer low-education (low-wage) workers remain; and ) a rate-of-return effect, whereby a rise in the share of highly-educated workers changes the returns to education, with an unclear effect on inequality. : Recent OECD analysis shows that a rise in the share of workers with upper-secondary education is associated with a decline in labour earnings inequality (Fournier and Koske, 2012). Given the evidence showing the importance of upper-secondary attainments on employment prospects, policies at all levels of compulsory education that contribute to increase good-quality attainment at upper-secondary level, may unambiguously contribute to boost GDP per capita as well as reducing wage dispersion. Examples of policy recommendations include better teacher recruitment, training and assessment (Chile, France, India, Indonesia and South Africa), early identification and special support for pupils at risk of dropping out (Denmark), development of individualised teaching (France), enhancing school accountability (Czech Republic, Iceland, New Zealand and Norway) and raising incentives to attract and retain high-school principals and teachers in disadvantaged schools (Czech Republic, France, Iceland). et al. ). Improving general access to education by poorer households contributes to reducing socio-economic segregation, making educational achievement less dependent on economic and social background. Research has also shown that a more equitable distribution of educational opportunities also results in a more equitable distribution of labour income (de Gregorio and Lee, 2002). In this respect, policies that facilitate access to education and enhance learning skills for individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds, such as strengthening links between schools and home, and delaying tracking in education should contribute to reduce income inequality. These policy initiatives are likely to deliver large positive returns over an individual’s entire lifetime, particularly for the underprivileged (Chetty et al. ). Specific recommendations include strengthening the involvement of employers (Estonia, Turkey), establishing an obligation to offer learning opportunities for youth neither in education, employment or training (Estonia), ensuring that vocational education programmes provide relevant skills for the labour market (United Kingdom), merging vocational training and vocational secondary schools (Hungary), expanding training and apprenticeships in high-unemployment areas (New Zealand), strengthening the VET evaluation system on tracking individual outcomes over time, especially for individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds (Portugal), and developing work place training (Slovak Republic). Insofar as more effective VET is likely to deliver adapted skills formation and higher employability, contributing thereby to address labour market mismatches and reduce unemployment, it is seen as helping both growth and income equality. et al. et al. The introduction of thresholds is important also to avoid that higher property taxation feed through higher tenant’s rents for poor individuals. The use of tax expenditures which often most benefit higher-income groups – such as tax breaks for health, tertiary education, owner-occupied housing and retirement savings – has been growing (OECD, 2010b). Reducing or eliminating these tax breaks, including the preferential tax treatment of home ownership, with features such as tax reliefs on mortgage interest, reduced taxation of capital gains from the sale of a principal residence and non-taxation of imputed rents, may bring both higher productivity – by reducing policy-induced distortions in resource allocation – and lower inequality. Reducing or eliminating tax expenditures is a priority in Canada, Denmark, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the United States. e.g.  Bourlès et al. et al. et al. et al. et al. et al. et al. : Reducing remaining barriers to FDI or aligning screening procedures with what is granted to the most favoured nation is a policy priority in Indonesia, New Zealand and Australia. Lifting more specific sector barriers to FDI is a priority for Iceland (electricity and fisheries), Mexico (transport, media and fixed-line telecom and financial services), Japan and Korea (in the service sector) and India (aviation, multi-brand retail), where targeted barriers to trade should also be removed. Insofar as some of the rising trend in inequality in many advanced OECD countries can be attributed to growing economic integration of emerging market economies, recommendations aimed at further enhancing productivity through lower barriers to trade and FDI could in principle exacerbate wage inequality. However, lower prices resulting from competitive pressures and the increase in product variety makes all consumers unarguably better off, which may entail some redistribution in favour of low-income groups, depending on the goods concerned and their share in the consumption basket of the various income groups. Reducing support to agriculture (such as recommended for the European Union, Iceland, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, Turkey and the United States) by lowering tariffs and excise duties, abolishing quotas on agricultural products and delinking producer support from production (by shifting agricultural support away from price measures towards direct support to farmers) could disproportionally benefit lower income households, insofar as it lowers food prices. As well, the rents created by agricultural support sometimes accrue to high-income farmers – especially when it is granted in the form of price support. As regards energy subsidies, Indonesia is recommended to substantially reduce fossil-fuel subsidies and to consider also lowering electricity subsidies, coupled with targeted compensation schemes to the poor. Energy subsidies are often motivated on equity grounds, as poorer households’ income tends to be spent disproportionally on basic consumption goods, such as food and energy. However, there is a large body of evidence showing that fossil fuel subsidies are regressive. For instance, one study found that in 20 developing countries, the 20% richest households capture 43% of such subsidies (del Granado et al., priorities on income inequality in terms of their short-term and long-run effects. The table does not intend to assess the intensity of the impact on inequality of the different policy recommendations, but to illustrate the direction – either reducing or raising inequality – of growth enhancing structural reforms. Several recommendations have an undetermined impact on inequality. This is due to the fact that a specific policy may produce opposing effects on income inequality, so that the final prevailing effect is unknown ( e.g.  e.g.  2013 priorities have an undetermined impact on income inequality New Zealand United Kingdom United States Over the past two decades, economic growth has continued to increase the pressure on many natural assets – for instance through rising greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, waste production or water abstraction ( ). And, structural reforms aimed at boosting GDP can further increase the use of natural resources and generate higher pollution. On the other hand, many of the environmental pressures associated with growth in the past may not be sustainable in the future, implying potential growth bottlenecks and environment-related risks to growth. Preventing such outcomes may be costly – in terms of growth in the shorter term – but achieving the GDP growth in OECD and BRIICS has been accompanied by rising pressures on the environment Economic growth does not necessarily imply increased pressures on the environment but most often it does. Even so, these do not need to be detrimental for longer-term well-being as long as the value of generated benefits exceeds that of the total current and future costs of the damage. Sustainable growth can be achieved only if the environmental considerations are appropriately taken into account in economic agents’ decisions (OECD, 2011b). In practice however, pricing and regulation of environmental externalities and natural resources use are often inadequate, implying that more growth is likely to bring about more environmental pressures that risk threatening sustainability. e.g.  policy priorities on the natural environment. Many of these priorities, aimed at maximising GDP per capita, are likely to have no direct effect on the environment, beyond that due to increasing economic growth. Priorities that raise the costs of environmentally-harmful activity – such as an increase in environmental taxation ( ex ante priorities on the environment is often uncertain Number of recommendations with likely effect on environment, but the direction depending on implementation details and policy setting Number of recommendations with little or no direct effect on environment New Zealand United Kingdom United States B. Reforms that have undetermined impact on environmental performance – the outcome depending on the way they are implemented or due to offsetting effects e.g.  – Tax exemptions for cleaner activities can be scrapped ( e.g.  e.g.  e.g.  – With inappropriate pricing of environmental externalities, can facilitate entry of less-environmentally friendly producers. Lower prices may lead to higher use (rebound effects). +/– Further complicated due to the presence of EU emission trading system (ETS) in some countries ( e.g.  – More infrastructure provision ( e.g.  e.g.  e.g.  – The reduction of support to eco-farming may discourage cleaner agriculture, and increasing reliance on imports may shift pollution (and emissions) abroad and increase pollution from international transport. e.g.  e.g.  – The direction of land-use change is often likely to be environmentally harmful ( e.g.  – Can increase car commuting and related emissions if people move further from their work places and public transport availability is not sufficient. Some environmental aspects may be difficult to assess in a national policy context For global or regional issues, common pool resource sustainability requires that the common environmental burden – for example, gas emissions in case of climate change or fish catch in case of fisheries – needs to be under control, while the distribution among countries is less relevant, at least from the environmental point of view. In principle, this implies that emission reductions are not strictly necessary in each single country and some countries may have, or develop, a competitive advantage in emission-intensive production, within the limits of the overall sustainable environmental burden. In fact, from an overall economic efficiency perspective, it would make sense that reductions are made where they are least costly. et al. emissions are capped, with permits traded under the EU Emission Trading Scheme, the pricing mechanisms should guarantee the reduction as stipulated by the cap in the zone as a whole and at a uniform abatement cost. Any additional country-specific policy instruments that address emissions under the cap may reduce them in a given country, but, as long as the cap is binding, will not affect overall emissions. Hence for instance, measures facilitating entry of renewable energy producers – which can have various other benefits – will have no effect on the total emission levels. By lowering the price of emissions, the additional measures can however yield less tangible, though not necessarily less important benefits, such as facilitating future tightening of the cap (Braathen, 2011). ), and has generally been decreasing. Of the countries with a recommendation to rely more on such tax sources, France, Belgium and the United States tend to have relatively low environmentally-related revenues (both with respect to total revenues and to GDP), with Finland, Estonia and Korea at the other end of the spectrum. Notably, the bulk of environmentally-related tax revenues concern fuel taxes (on average over 70%, mainly from transport) which in some countries may already be taxed beyond the associated environmental (and non-environmental) externalities. For instance, this is often claimed to be the case for many European OECD countries (Parry and Small, 2005; Ley and Boccardo, 2010). For several OECD countries, excise taxation is considered exceeding the externalities related to petrol, but underpricing diesel (Égert, 2012). In addition, a large share of environmentally-related revenues comes from motor vehicle taxes (over 20% on average). et al. Average over 2008-09 for Canada and the Slovak Republic. e.g.  Improving the provision or management of infrastructure is a priority for several countries. The environmental effects will depend on implementation details. In countries where congestion charges or road pricing are recommended as a mean to increase economic efficiency and growth (Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland and the United Kingdom), they are likely to also benefit the environment, with the magnitude of the effects linked to the introduced prices as well as the availability of alternatives, such as public transport, more efficient vehicles or opportunities for teleworking. Benefits are likely to materialize both on a global scale (lower CO According to the IEA, some 370 million people in India and Indonesia combined lack access to the electricity grid (Database on 2009 electricity access, IEA, 2011). e.g.  World Health Organisation (WHO) thresholds, in micrograms of particulate matter smaller than 2.5 microns in diameter. Exposure to air pollution exceeding 10 micrograms of PM2.5 per cubic meter is considered by the WHO as significantly increasing health risks. OECD (2011),  e.g.  e.g.  e.g.  Belgium, France, where the effects of widespread support for renewable energy have been constrained by the barriers to grid access (OECD, 2011d, 2012b). In a similar manner, recommendations to improve the integration of electricity markets (in Canada and among European Union countries) may facilitate the entry and improve the competitiveness of renewable energy producers (Benatia et al. e.g.  Currently, reducing producer support is a growth priority for Iceland, Japan, Korea, Norway, Switzerland, the United States and the European Union. For Turkey, the recommendation focuses on delinking support from production and shifting away from price support measures. In the majority of countries concerned, high support is coupled with high nutrient surpluses ( Agriculture puts strong pressure on the environment, in particular in countries with high producer support EU MAX (NLD) indicates the European Union country with the maximum nitrate surpluses (Netherlands). Data on PSE for individual EU countries is not available. 2011). As a result, they contribute to higher GHG emissions and air pollution. In Indonesia, such subsidies amount to over USD 15.8 billion per year or roughly 2¾ per cent of GDP (2008-10 average of energy consumption subsidies). More broadly, support to the consumption of fossil fuels in OECD countries is estimated to reach some USD 55-90 billion annually (about 0.2% of GDP), while exceeding USD 100 billion in the BRIICS (some 1½ per cent of GDP).The figures for fossil fuel support in OECD and BRIICS countries are calculated using different methodologies and hence not directly comparable. BRIICS data is 2008-10 average and is based on the price-gap methodology (IEA, 2011). OECD data (2005-11) comes from OECD inventories of fossil fuel support (OECD, 2013). to stimulate the actual development and deployment of new, cleaner technologies – a crucial aspect of achieving more growth coupled with sustainable environmental externalities. One factor contributing to the severity of the crisis was the prior build-up of large and unsustainable fiscal and current account imbalances, in part mirroring credit excesses fuelled by capital flows, which resulted in growing financial instability. Both government and external imbalances have to some extent narrowed over the past two or three years, and given widespread commitments and – in some cases – market pressures for budget consolidation, government imbalances are expected to continue to diminish over the next few years. But in the case of current account imbalances, the extent to which the recent narrowing reflects cyclical rather than structural factors remains unclear. Insofar as they affect economy-wide saving and investment, the set of structural policy priorities identified to boost productivity and employment also have implications for external imbalances, in a way that may or may not contribute to further unwinding. This section highlights the likely impact on budget deficits and current account imbalances of recommendations for OECD and BRIICS’ countries in the areas identified as country-specific policy priorities and reported in Chapter 1. ), those having the most significant influence concern specific areas of financial sector policies – such as banking supervision and macro-prudential regulations – that require strong international co­ordination. Such policies are thus treated separately in priorities as this in an area where collective rather than isolated action is needed (see Box 1.1 in Growth-enhancing structural reforms can have both a direct (first-round) impact and an induced (second-round) effect on government budgets. They have a direct impact when their implementation either requires additional public resources or – less frequently – entails initial expenditure cutbacks or revenue increases. The direct impact will thus vary across specific policy recommendations. As for the induced effect, the magnitude is likely to differ depending on whether reforms boost growth mainly through employment or productivity (Elmeskov and Sutherland, 2012). In both cases, the result is higher public revenues through tax base expansion. However, reforms that raise growth mainly through productivity gains will also increase public spending insofar as public and private sector wages grow more or less in parallel, and that social transfers are set as a proportion of income ( e.g.  In contrast, when the boost to growth comes mainly through sustainably higher employment rates, the induced effect is more likely to be a permanent increase in the budget balance, provided the employment gains are concentrated in the private sector (OECD, 2010f). In such a case, both the wage and non-wage components of public-sector spending fall as a share of GDP, in addition to the potential reduction in social transfers, such as unemployment or retirement benefits. Estimates based on past sensitivity of government revenues and expenditures to changes in employment suggest that a 1 percentage point permanent increase in the employment rate could generate a sustained improvement in the budget balance of between 0.3 to 0.8 percentage points. Countries expected to benefit the most are those with a high initial level of public-sector expenditures relative to GDP ( e.g.  The scope for budgetary gains from reform is therefore substantial – in particular for countries with relatively low employment rates – but the overall size will also depend on the direct budgetary impact of the policies recommended to boost growth, i.e.  are those affecting public outlays. That said, while being neutral in the short term, the most common recommendation in the area of taxation – shifting the composition away from direct (labour and capital) and towards indirect (consumption, property and environment) sources – may improve budget positions in the long run insofar as it raises both overall efficiency and employment. For instance, empirical estimates based on past country experience suggest that an increase of 20% in childcare spending may be required to raise female participation rates by 1 percentage point (Jaumotte, 2003). The recommendations to extend the coverage or to raise replacement rates of unemployment insurance benefits also imply higher direct government transfers, the magnitude of which depends not only on the level and evolution of unemployment, but also on whether additional resources are required to administer the programme. Conversely, the two most common recommendations to foster the participation of older workers – raising retirement age and closing paths to early retirement – have the potential to generate substantial direct budgetary saving. Several countries facing high unemployment rates and a large proportion of long-term unemployed are recommended to strengthen ALMPs, in particular job-search assistance and training programmes. The direct budgetary cost of such measures can be substantial. As an illustration, earlier empirical analysis has suggested that the unemployment rate in the average OECD country could be reduced by 1 percentage point if spending on ALMPs was raised to the level observed in Sweden (OECD, 2007). In most countries where this is recommended, current spending on job placement services is between 0.1 to 0.2 per cent of GDP below the level observed in Sweden, with a particularly large gap in Greece, Luxembourg, Slovak Republic, South Africa and the United States. In Finland and Luxembourg, higher spending on activation measures could be partly funded in the short term by savings achieved through reductions in the level and duration of unemployment benefits, such as recommended for these countries ( In countries where this is recommended, a reduction in subsidies to agriculture (European Union, Iceland, Japan, Korea, Norway and Switzerland), energy (Indonesia) and housing (Denmark, Luxembourg, Poland and the United States) will generate direct savings to the budget, even if poorer households are compensated as suggested in the case of energy. The same goes for the recommendations to introduce or expand user fees for public services, in particular tuition fees in tertiary education (12 countries) and road pricing (Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom). The effect of policy priorities on current accounts through their impact on saving and investment From a national accounts perspective, a surplus or deficit in a country’s current account is reflected in a corresponding gap between domestic saving and investment as well as in an offsetting balance in the capital account. In many cases, structural reforms have effects on private and public saving and investment, and thereby on the external balance (see OECD, 2011e, Fournier and Koske, 2010). The main recommendations likely to either weaken or strengthen the current account are reported in 2013 policy recommendations on current account balances priority in this area Contributes by reducing households’ saving for precautionary motives. e.g.   saving One of the main motives for households’ saving is to provide a financial buffer in the event of a sudden drop in income – for instance resulting from a job loss – or of unforeseen spending such as in the case of a health incident involving costly and uninsured care. Virtually all OECD countries provide fairly extended social insurance against these risks, albeit to varying degrees of coverage and generosity. Another key motive for saving is to maintain consumption after working life. In this regard, the nature of public pension systems as well as the extent to which they are perceived to deliver adequate income at retirement also determines the saving behaviour of individuals and households. et al. e.g.  e.g.  e.g.  e.g.  Austria, Denmark, Estonia, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, the United Kingdom and the United States). Since they can also contribute to raise public saving, they can be expected to strengthen the current account. e.g.  Chile, Czech Republic, Ireland, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, Slovak Republic, Switzerland and the United Kingdom), recommendations aimed at raising labour force participation of women through reforms of the tax and benefit systems or improved access to affordable childcare could lower household saving. This is because as the sources of household income get better diversified, there may be less perceived need for precautionary saving. However, the magnitude of this effect could be tempered by the fact that some of these measures are often targeted at low-income households who often have little saving capacity in the first place. Reforms to the health system are advocated in New Zealand, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States, but in most cases recommendations focus on reducing costs through efficiency gains. The effect of such reforms on private saving is thus far from clear, but insofar as this may reduce public expenditures, total saving may be higher. e.g.  Product and financial market policies affect current accounts primarily through their impact on investment Recommendations that seek to strengthen incentives to invest in physical capital, intangible assets (human and knowledge capital) and public infrastructures will tend to weaken the current account position independently of whether they are recorded in national accounts as investment (tangible assets) or consumption (and thus lower saving as in the case of many intangible assets). While the bulk of recommendations in these areas focus on using existing resources more efficiently and on improving the return on investment – in which case the effect on total investment and the current account may only be felt in the medium term – some may entail a short-term increase in resources invested, either public or private. This is the case for instance with recommendations aimed directly at fostering investment in infrastructure (Brazil, India, Indonesia and New Zealand) or at increasing support for innovation (Australia, Estonia, Ireland and Russia). In the area of education, recommendations to ensure adequate school resources (Mexico, Turkey, India and Indonesia) may also require a short-term boost in public or private resources. One set of recommendations which applies to most countries consist in reforming product market regulation to achieve efficiency gains through stronger exposure to competition. By favouring new firms’ entry, price reductions and higher demand, a more competitive environment can stimulate investment, in particular if this is accompanied by a lower regulatory burden (Alesina et al. et al. et al. Assessing the overall impact of growth-oriented policies on current account balances e.g.  2013 priorities likely to weaken or strengthen the current account Number of recommendations with an undetermined impact on the current account New Zealand United Kingdom United States This includes countries where the current account balance is estimated to have exceeded 1 percentage point of GDP in 2012. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. e.g.  Efforts have been made to attract greater private participation in financing infrastructure projects, including by introducing a more favourable tax treatment of business losses for projects in the 2011-12 Budget. Access to pre-school education for all children aged four should be available by 2013 for 15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year. e.g.  Recent reforms to promote workforce participation have included a further reduction of personal income tax for low-income earners in the 2012-13 Budget, a phasing out of tax offsets for the dependent spouse since July 2011, changes in income support for single parents as from 2013, a gradual change in the retirement age from 65 in 2017 to 67 in 2023, new rules to foster partly-disabled people search for jobs since July 2012 and higher wage subsidies for employers hiring people with disability. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. leading OECD economies has continued to narrow, reflecting labour productivity gains. Improvements in labour force participation – especially of older workers – have been partly offset by cyclically declining average hours worked. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Gesundheitsstraße Tertiary attainment –  including of immigrants – is below EU average, in contrast to high post-secondary non-tertiary graduation rates. Drop-out rates from tertiary education are also high, holding back productivity growth and innovation. consolidation package envisages additional public funds for tertiary education of about EUR 1 billion over 2013-16, partly allocated based on performance indicators. The New Secondary School ( Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). The minimum age for early retirement is being gradually increased to 62 with 40 years of career, but earlier exit is still possible for longer careers. These changes were approved in 2012 and will be fully implemented in 2015. The minimum age (and career requirement) in the pre-pension system is also being increased to 55 years. Moreover, pre-pension years prior to the age of 60 will no longer be fully included in the calculation of pension rights. The energy regulator’s access to information was improved in 2011 and its powers enlarged the following year, including right to approve energy suppliers’ proposed tariff increases. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). Implicit tax on continued work for five more years embedded in the regular old-age pension scheme for 60 year-olds. First degree graduation rates for typical age at tertiary-type A level. , No. 370, OECD Publishing; OECD calculations and OECD Pension models; OECD, The 2011-20 National Education Plan continues to provide additional funding and incentives for basic and professional education. New programmes, established in 2011, finance vocational training of low-skilled workers and scholarships for tertiary education. Increase private investment in infrastructure and remove remaining barriers to competition New concessions for airports have been successfully offered to the private sector in 2012. Furthermore, sale of concessions for 9 highways and 12 railways has been announced. . These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). FDI restrictiveness includes the “screening” sub-component. Move towards more integrated and competitive electricity markets. Eliminate Canada Post’s legally protected monopoly. Take steps to apply the renegotiated Labour Mobility Chapter of the Agreement on Internal Trade as broadly as possible, and review aspects of the regulation of professions and skilled trades that continue to hinder interprovincial mobility and competition. The Harmonized Sales Tax has by now been implemented in half of the ten provinces. The federal government has gradually reduced the general corporate income tax rate to 15% by early 2012. Also, the 2012 federal budget extends the capital cost allowance, among others, to a broader range of bio-energy equipment. The 2012 federal budget introduced significant tightening of Employment Insurance (EI) rules based on a worker’s history of use of EI benefits: the longer and more frequently workers have previously claimed employment insurance, the broader their job search will have to be and the lower the wages they must be willing to accept. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Upgrade teachers’ qualifications through minimum standards and rigorous quality assurance in initial teacher education. Streamline and extend existing student loans and scholarship schemes, while strengthening quality standards for all institutions that enrol students benefiting from subsidies. Make all loans repayments income-contingent. In 2011, a law was passed that extends paid maternity leave to at least 24 weeks, extends the right to maternity leave to workers on temporary contracts and creates a paternity leave. The 2013 government budget increases the coverage of childcare and early education by 10 000 and 25 000 new places, respectively, and the value of subsidies for low-income families by 20%. No action taken since the 2009 reform of competition law. Regulatory barriers for start-ups and the time to start a business were substantially reduced in 2011 (from 22 to 7 days) by easing the obtainment of permits and the payment of taxes as well as by streamlining notification requirements, reducing total costs by 25%. equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) Database. These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. e.g.  Strengthening migrants’ social protection and rights and reducing human capital differentials across the country should improve productivity while also reducing income inequalities. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita and GDP per employee (in constant 2005 PPPs). Data refer to 2010. Graduation rate at upper secondary level (first-time graduate) and graduation rate for typical age at tertiary-type A level (first-time graduate). Encourage the establishment of new privately-owned companies in areas such as electricity distribution, telecommunication and airlines – which are currently dominated by large state-controlled enterprises. e.g.  equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) Database. These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Data refer to 1993 and 2008. For 1995, the OECD average excludes Estonia, Iceland, Korea, Poland, Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Switzerland. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). on returning to work for single parents and households’ second earners by raising public expenditures on childcare services. Support earlier return of parents with children to the labour market by promoting flexible working arrangements. Decrease the duration of combined maternity and parental leave to two years. enhance schools’ accountability. Implement the proposed tertiary education reform. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD.  by opening the Danish electricity market to international power plugs and allowing the provision of retail services from places other than regular stores. In 2012, competition law was strengthened with stricter penalties for violations of competition policy and a taskforce was set up to explore ways to improve public procurement. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. As of 2013, youth and recent graduates under the age of 30 unemployed for more than three months will be guaranteed a tailored response from the employment offices. Shift of the responsibility of employment services to municipalities after 12 months of unemployment, with individual follow-up and monitoring, will be experimented. Value-added tax (VAT) rates will be increased by 1 percentage point in 2013, some exemptions have been removed and excise duties on some goods have increased. Taxes on transport fuels and the annual vehicle tax have been raised, and the car tax scale has been adjusted to reinforce environmental steering. Lower labour taxation. Offset the revenue loss with higher indirect – including green – taxes. Increase property tax rates and align assessment values with market valuations. Raise the revenue efficiency of the VAT by eliminating reduced rates. Municipal services’ productivity is declining, which weighs on public finances. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. The end-of-2010 pension reform and the 2012 elimination of the job-search exemption for older unemployed have significantly reduced disincentives to work at older ages. Labour taxes will be reduced by 6 percentage points on earnings up to 2.5 times the minimum wage, financed by spending cuts, and value-added tax and environmental tax increases. Incentives have been put in place to facilitate the emergence of high-quality universities and research centres. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. The deeply ingrained labour market duality reduces firms’ ability to adapt to shocks, thus hindering productivity, and unfairly distributes the burden of adjusting the workforce to changes in activity. Shift the tax burden away from labour, and continue to reduce the minimum cost of labour Labour taxes will be reduced by 6 percentage points on earnings up to 2.5 times the minimum wage by 2014, financed by spending cuts, and VAT and environmental tax increases. Combat school failure at an early stage, limit repetition drastically, and develop individualised instruction. Improve teachers’ training by focusing on knowledge transmission and creativity, and boost incentives to attract high-quality teachers in disadvantaged schools. The October 2010 pension reform –  which included a two-year increase in the legal retirement age and an extension of the contribution period for a full pension in line with rising life expectancy – seems to be helping to change employers’ and workers’ attitudes towards working at older ages, and the employment rate of older workers has increased throughout the crisis. The job-search exemption for the older unemployed disappeared in January 2012; however, the generous unemployment insurance for this group and the mechanism for a mutually agreed separation in place since 2008 are liable to favour disguised early retirement. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Announced reforms for schools introduce more flexible curricula and a system for teachers’ performance evaluation. A new tertiary education framework law, including measures for better governance and performance-based funding for universities, was approved in 2012. A new bill in 2012 stipulates a reduction of 22% in the minimum wage for all levels, with an additional 10% for the young below 25. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Central and Eastern European countries is the average of Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovenia. EU is the average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. ; Ladányi, T. and R. Kierzenkowski (2012), , No. 944, OECD Publishing. The unwelcomed dissolution of the second pillar of the pension system in 2011 incidentally diminished expected replacement rates. Meanwhile, the statutory retirement age will increase from 62 to 65 years by 2022. Early retirement options in the general pension regime were eliminated for men in 2011 and from 2012, and new and existing retirement benefits of special pension regimes have been be reduced by the amount of the income tax (up to the statutory retirement age). Postpone early tracking of students and reform teachers’ lifelong training. Continue to diversify educational pathways by alternating study and on-the-job training. Merge vocational training and vocational secondary schools. business environment stability. Ease entry and exit procedures and regulations on the size of retail outlets and in professional services. Reduce price controls in the competitive segments of network industries and banks’ tax regulations. Further cut compliance costs. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Reduce foreign ownership restrictions in the electricity and fisheries sectors. Divest the National Power Company’s generation activities, which benefit from a cost-of-capital advantage conferred by government ownership, to create a competitive market in electricity generation. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per employee and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Graduation rate at upper secondary level (first-time graduate) and graduation rate for typical age at tertiary-type A level (first-time graduate). . These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Data refer to 1993 and 2008. For 1995, the OECD average excludes Estonia, Iceland, Korea, Poland, Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Switzerland. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per employee and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Graduation rate at upper secondary level for typical age from the general programmes and graduation rate for typical age at tertiary-type A level (first degree). Funds to ease poor students’ access to education are channelled to provinces to improve disbursement. A Higher Education Bill has been passed that will increase university autonomy. Make income transfer programmes conditional on children attending secondary school, and eliminate the secondary school enrolment fee for disadvantaged children in order to boost enrolment rates. To improve teaching quality, assess teachers’ pedagogical skills regularly. Regulatory authorities’ lack of independence and regulatory uncertainties, in particular on land acquisition processes, hinder investment. Reform labour regulation and cap minimum wage increases to address the problem of informality Energy subsidies are costly, inequitable and inconsistent with the government’s green strategy. Ease barriers to entrepreneurship and investment and strengthen institutions to fight corruption equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) Database. These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. The R&amp;D tax credit was given greater scope and flexibility in the 2012 Budget. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Raising the quality of education, particularly for minorities, in combination with welfare reforms can potentially ease Israel’s high rate of poverty and deep socio-economic divides while promoting long-term growth. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Some dimensions of corporate governance in Israel’s large and complex company groups pose a general risk of market collusion and inefficient capital allocation, and high prices for some retail goods indicate weak competition. equivalents from the International Energy Agency (IEA) Database. These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. e.g.  Pursuing rebalancing of protection from jobs to workers’ income should improve productivity by promoting a better allocation of labour to the most productive uses. Lower regulatory and ownership barriers to competition can encourage investment and productivity growth. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Pursue rebalancing of protection from jobs to workers’ income Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Narrowing the productivity gap requires reforms to reduce entry barriers and encourage inward FDI, particularly outside manufacturing, where productivity has lagged behind. Other priorities include breaking down labour market duality, making the tax system more pro-growth and enhancing the competitiveness of agriculture, which would also facilitate Japan’s participation in trade agreements. Increasing female labour force participation would mitigate the demographic headwinds from a falling population. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Scale back agricultural protection and shift its composition away from price support to direct support for farmers, thereby facilitating Japan’s participation in trade agreements. With the highest corporate tax rate among OECD countries and a narrow base and the lowest consumption tax rate, the tax system lowers Japan’s growth potential. Implement the government’s proposal to hike the consumption tax rate as planned, while broadening the income tax bases and further reducing the corporate tax rate. Encourage women’s labour participation,  by increasing the availability of affordable, high-quality childcare, reducing labour supply distortions in the tax/benefit system and addressing labour market duality. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Narrowing the productivity gap requires policies to reduce entry barriers and encourage inward foreign direct investment (FDI), particularly in services, where productivity has lagged behind. In addition, it is important to break down labour market duality, make the tax system more favourable for growth and enhance the competitiveness of agriculture. Another priority, in the face of rapid population ageing and declining working hours, is to increase women’s labour force participation. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Reduce barriers to entry for domestic and foreign firms in network industries and services  by increasing penalties for violating the Anti-Monopoly and Fair Trade Act and reducing exemptions to it. Improve the business climate to attract FDI in services, in part by reducing obstacles to cross-border mergers and acquisitions and enhancing the transparency of tax and regulatory policies. The government introduced subsidies for tuition fees for childcare and kindergarten for all children below the age of 2 and for 5 year-olds in 2012, regardless of household income. The government launched a scheme in late 2011 to subsidise contributions to social insurance schemes for low-wage workers in firms with less than five workers. The government’s on-the-job training programme was extended to non-regular workers from 2012. High producer support, which is twice the OECD average, imposes a large burden on consumers and reduces Korea’s growth potential by misallocating resources. . These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Implicit tax on continued work for five more years embedded in the regular old-age pension scheme for 60 year-olds. , No. 370, OECD Publishing, OECD calculations and OECD pension models. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). A set of reforms to centralise business entry procedures under a single ministry are being carried out and have already helped simplify new business approval, reduce the required fees and eliminate minimum capital requirements. A 2011 Supreme Court decision limited the ability of telecom companies to ignore rulings of the regulator while challenging them in court, and has given more weight to the public interest in Measures have been taken to lower housing tax distortions and facilitate residential property transactions, though more is needed to address housing market rigidities. The government’s coalition agreement contains welcome plans to simplify dismissal procedures and to reduce the duration of unemployment benefits. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Increase reduced value-added tax rates to further finance lower labour taxes. Phase out more rapidly the transferability of the individual tax credit. Reduce the effective marginal tax rate arising from the family-income-based tax credit and make childcare support more dependent on second earners’ income rather than family income. The coalition agreement stipulates a shortening and simplification of dismissal procedures by closing the judicial route, except for appeals, and a EUR 75 000 cap on severance pay. In 2011, the housing transaction tax was lowered from 6% to 2%. From 2014, tax deductibility of mortgage interest will be progressively reduced. Social rental housing has been restricted (for new tenants) to households with an income up to EUR 33 000. The coalition agreement stipulates a reduction in the maximum duration of unemployment benefits from 36 to 24 months. Benefits will decline over the unemployment spell as they will be based on the minimum wage (instead of the last salary) after 12 months of unemployment. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. The government is proceeding with sales of minority stakes in three electricity generators, a coal mining company and Air New Zealand. The government has committed NZD 1.35 billion to its Ultrafast Broadband Initiative, with private co-investments, but failed to provide a full cost-benefit analysis. A range of initiatives, including free tertiary education places and Trade Academies are being established under the Youth Guarantee to increase achievement of 16-17 year-olds. Some funding for early childhood education is being targeted at low socio-economic communities. The 2012 Budget provided funding for new models of integrated family care and of chronic-care management. Recent reforms at the District Health Boards (DHBs), notably the introduction of performance targets and tighter budget controls, have helped to cut costs. Increase DHBs’ incentives and autonomy to pursue greater hospital efficiency, improve workforce utilisation, integrate primary and secondary care, and better manage chronic care. Provide education, assistance and incentives to adopt healthy lifestyles, especially among minority populations. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). GDP per capita (Mainland) excludes petroleum production and shipping. While total GDP overestimates the sustainable income potential, mainland GDP slightly underestimates it since returns on the financial assets the petroleum fund holds abroad are not included. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Tighten access to sickness and disability schemes, with stronger enforcement of back-to-work plans and independent checks of GPs’ assessments. If such action does not lower take-up, reduce the replacement rate for long-term sickness absence and shift more costs onto employers. No action to encourage reduction in school numbers, although some small schools are closing. In 2011, the support for teachers’ continuous professional development was improved. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. EU is the average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. For 1995, EU and OECD averages exclude Estonia, Iceland, Korea, Poland, Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Switzerland. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Pre-school education for 5 year-olds became compulsory in 2011. Make the release of zoning plans by municipalities mandatory, introduce compulsory escrow accounts to protect buyers’ advances, and further relax rent controls. Remove fiscal incentives (reduced value-added tax rate) supporting the residential sector. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). The EPL indicators for 2013 are based on an update conducted in the context of the 2012  Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Salaries of judges were increased in October 2012. The 2012-13 National Anti-Corruption Action Plan includes a requirement to introduce greater protection of whistleblowers. Since November 2011, members of legislative bodies have to report their incomes and assets, and banks are obliged to provide information about public officials’ accounts, including family members. The rate of contribution to health insurance was increased in 2011. The patient’s choice of health service providers was introduced in 2012. Regular wage increases for doctors are decreed until 2018. Excise taxes on alcohol and tobacco are being systematically increased. recommendations no longer considered as a priority Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Central and eastern European countries is the average of Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland and Slovenia. Implicit taxes on continued work for five more years embedded in the regular old-age pension scheme for 60 year-olds and in (as defined in Duval, 2003) for 55 and 60 year-olds. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. , No. 370, OECD Publishing, OECD calculations and OECD pension models. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per employee and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Projection of Population by Level of Education Attainment, Age and Sex for 120 countries for 2005-2050 Funding of trainee teachers and school infrastructure is being increased during 2012-14. In 2011 new national assessment exams were introduced and the roll-out of workbooks to improve literacy and numeracy in Grades 1-6 began, and in 2012 a schools evaluation unit was created. . These data conform to UNFCCC GHG emission calculations but are not directly comparable to data for Annex I countries due to definitional issues. The OECD average is calculated according to the same definition. Data refer to 1993 and 2008. For 1995, the OECD average excludes Estonia, Iceland, Korea, Poland, Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Switzerland. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. First-time graduation rates for typical age at type A level. Introduce comprehensive monitoring and evaluation of employment services and labour market programmes at the regional level. Monitor benefit recipients’ job search efforts more closely and link benefit payments to results. Phase out hiring subsidies and extend training measures for the unemployed. The legal retirement age was raised from 65 to 67 years for workers with contribution records of less than 38.5 years in 2011. Access to early retirement was limited and subsidies for partial early retirement reduced. Contribution periods required for a full pension were lengthened somewhat. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. First-time graduation rates for typical age at type A level. The central government’s co-funding of childcare facilities will continue until 2014. Further increase funding for childcare facilities and provide it through a national voucher scheme to pay for accredited facilities. Move from joint to individual tax assessment of spouses’ incomes. To seek efficiency gains in network industries, it was recommended that the power of regulators be strengthened, vertical separation be further pursued, and benchmark regulation be introduced in electricity. In telecommunications, it was recommended to remove legal restrictions on competitors’ access to the local loop. It was also recommended to sell government stakes in both industries and to privatise the incumbent postal service provider. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Enrolment capacity in primary and secondary schools were further increased. In 2012, the length of compulsory education was extended to 12 years. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Investing in human capital, developing infrastructure, loosening planning restrictions and strengthening public sector efficiency would help boost productivity. Priorities to enhance labour utilisation should focus on pursuing welfare reforms, improving work incentives, especially for lone parents and households’ second earners. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Percentage gap with respect to the simple average of the highest 17 OECD countries in terms of GDP per capita, GDP per hour worked and GDI per capita (in constant 2005 PPPs). Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. The tariff on sugarcane-based ethanol and domestic subsidies for corn-based ethanol expired at the end of 2011. However, the 2012 Farm Bill increases production-related subsidies. Share in world GHG emissions is calculated using International Energy Agency (IEA) data and is an average of years 2005, 2008 and 2010. Average of 21 EU countries members of the OECD. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios) , No. 14. , No. 14. , No. 370 and OECD calculations. Average tax wedge – single parent versus second earner Childcare expenditure cover children under three years old enrolled in childcare and children between three and five years old enrolled in pre-school. Childcare refers to formal day-care services, such as day care centres and family day care. Pre-school includes kindergartens and day-care centres which usually provide an educational content as well as traditional care for children (ISCED 0 under UNESCO’s classification system). Local government spending may not be properly captured in the data for federal countries. et al. , No. 799. et al. , No. 799. et al. , No. 799. et al. , No 799. et al. , No. 799. Tariffs reflect the simple average of effectively applied tariffs. See World Trade Organization’s (WTO), For the United States, average of PISA scores only in mathematics and science for 2006. Data for India is the average for 2010 of the states of Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh and therefore may not be representative of nation-wide outcomes. , Vol. 2012/2. 