 was launched in 2005 as a new form of structural surveillance complementing the OECD’s long­standing country and sector­specific surveys. In line with the OECD’s 1960 founding Convention, the aim is to help promote vigorous sustainable economic growth and improve the well­being of OECD citizens. This surveillance is based on a systematic and in­depth analysis of structural policies and their outcomes across OECD members, relying on a set of internationally comparable and regularly updated policy indicators with a well­established link to performance. Using these indicators, alongside the expertise of OECD committees and staff, policy priorities and recommendations are derived for each member and, since the 2011 issue, six key non­member economies with which the OECD works closely (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russian Federation and South Africa). From one issue to the next, In gauging performance, the focus is on GDP per capita, productivity and employment. As highlighted in the past and again in this issue, this leaves out some important dimensions of well­being. For this reason, regularly features thematic chapters dedicated to these other dimensions, and increasingly looks at the side effects of growth­enhancing priorities on other government policy objectives. This 2016 Productivity – a central ingredient in the pursuit of wellbeing – has been decelerating in a vast majority of countries, with the slowdown going back to around 2000, at least in advanced economies. While this may partly reflect measurement issues, a common set of unsettling trends lie behind the aggregate slowdown: the dispersion of productivity growth across firms within industries, the decline in the growth rate of investment in knowledge-based capital, and the reduction in the pace of business creation. These trends are outcomes from problems in the basic policy environment – market competition and innovation, labour market institutions, financial structure and robustness – which also contribute to unfavourable trends in income distribution. Giving international trade a fresh boost requires that recent multilateral agreements in this area be forcefully implemented but also that efforts be made to further reduce barriers in the form foreign ownership restrictions or preferential treatments of domestic suppliers with respect to public procurement, taxes and subsidies. In several EMEs – notably Brazil, India and Indonesia – barriers to infrastructure investment need to be addressed to significantly improve the transport and logistic services that underpin cross‑border trade. Deeper global integration and the growing reliance on intangible forms of capital stresses the importance of collective policy approaches in the areas of competition law enforcement, regulatory harmonisation, basic research and the taxation of mobile capital. One major achievement in 2015 has been the global agreement on a list of measures to limit tax avoidance by multinationals through the so-called Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) action plan elaborated under the auspices of the G20 and the OECD. Sustained growth and job creation are the best ways to improve income distribution, since the low- income and less-skilled bear the brunt of economic downturns. A challenge for several advanced economies – in particular those facing persistently high unemployment such as France, Italy and Spain – is to shift social protection from specific jobs to individuals so as to better support the process of jobs and firms turnover that underpins dynamic, growing economies. Reforms in this area will help to improve job opportunities for youth and low-skilled workers, particularly hard hit by unemployment. For emerging economies, stronger social protection is needed to reduce informality and inequality, while fostering domestic consumption. Strong employment growth is critical to ensure that growth benefits all segments of society, but it is not sufficient. In several countries, a large and rising share of the growth benefits have accrued to high-income households, while income at the bottom has been stagnant for many years. In the United Kingdom and in particular the United States, reforms to provide better access to high-quality education for students from disadvantaged backgrounds combined with measures to make the tax system more efficient and equitable would help to make growth more inclusive. In some countries such as Italy and Korea, household income has not kept up with GDP gains over the past two decades. Chapter 3 of this report explores the channels through which the income generated through GDP is transmitted to households. Given the breadth and evolving nature of the growth and inclusiveness challenges facing advanced and emerging economies, the slowdown in the pace of structural reform documented in this report is deeply concerning. While the pace of reform should be accelerating to restore sustainable and equitable growth, the pace of reforms appears to have steadily declined since 2011-12. While some countries have made considerable efforts, many have taken very little action and countries with ambitious reform programmes, such as in India, Japan and Turkey face significant political challenges and the risk of losing momentum. Progress has been made on the G20 action plan to raise reform efforts, but much remains to be fully implemented. The codes for country names and currencies used in this volume are those attributed to them by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Global growth prospects remain clouded in the near term, with emerging-market economies losing steam, world trade slowing down and the recovery in advanced economies being dragged down by persistently weak investment. These near-term concerns arise against the background of a widespread deceleration of productivity gains, with the downward trend going back to early 2000s – at least in advanced economies – and with little signs of revival. The growth slowdown observed among emerging-market economies over the past couple of years also raises questions about their capacity to further closing the income gap vis-à-vis most advanced countries. The case for structural reforms, combined with supporting demand policies, remains strong to sustainably lift productivity and the job creation that will promote improvements in equity. offers a comprehensive assessment to help governments reflect on how policy reforms might affect their citizens’ wellbeing and to design policy packages that best meet their objectives. The global slowdown in productivity growth has been characterised by the widening of the dispersion of productivity growth across firms within industries, in particular between frontier firms – essentially multinational enterprises which have maintained steady productivity growth – and all other firms that operate well within the productivity frontier. Removing barriers that stifle entrepreneurship and limit the capacity of firms to make the most of knowledge and technological diffusion is a reform priority. Developments in the household income share of GDP can be assessed by looking at the profile of households’ labour, capital and secondary ( i.e. net government transfers) income share of GDP. A large number of countries have experienced a concomitant decline in the labour share of GDP and in the share of capital income going to households, suggesting that a rising share of profits has been retained by the corporate sector instead of being redistributed to the household sector. This chapter reviews the main growth challenges faced by OECD and selected non-OECD countries and takes stock of the progress made since 2015 in the adoption and implementation of structural policy reforms to address these challenges. Progress is assessed on the basis of actions taken in response to The slowdown in the pace of reforms observed in 2013-14 has continued in 2015, even after taking into account measures that are in the pipeline but that have yet to be fully implemented. have been fully implemented in 2015, while another 36% are in the process of implementation. For emerging economies, fewer recommendations have been fully implemented in 2015 but initial steps have been made on around 44% of recommendations. The last available year is 2013 for Switzerland and Chile; 2012 for Mexico. While the weakness of investment coincided with the crisis, the slowdown in multi-factor productivity among advanced countries goes all the way back to the early 2000s ( ), an indication that deep structural weaknesses may cast a shadow on future growth prospects. The contributing factors deserving most attention include a slowdown in the diffusion of innovation from firms at the technological frontier – mostly multinationals which have enjoyed steady productivity growth – to lagging firms, weaker investment in knowledge-based capital and a decline in the pace of business start-ups (OECD, 2015b). Yet, in many OECD countries facing stagnant or falling working-age population and declining returns to higher education, the role of innovation as a source of productivity gains and medium-term rises in material living standards will become even more prevalent. In addition, many countries are still facing high long-term unemployment or relatively high rates of labour market withdrawals, in both cases contributing to skills erosion, social exclusion and income inequality. GDP per employee for non OECD countries. For Brazil, Indonesia and Mexico data refer to 1991-2000 instead of 1990-2000. Against this background, the case for ambitious structural reforms, combined with supportive demand policies, remains strong to lift potential growth. The 2015 issue of This chapter reviews the main growth challenges faced by OECD countries and selected non-OECD economies and takes stock of actions taken that relate to policy recommendations on reform priorities laid out in the 2015 issue of . The priorities are selected with a view to improving material living standards through employment and productivity gains. The policy areas covered include product and labour market regulations, tax and benefit systems, rules affecting foreign trade and investment, education and training, as well as innovation. The chapter specifically evaluates the extent to which the countries have addressed such reform priorities, mainly focusing on the actions taken in 2015. The implementation of reforms is defined as the introduction of relevant laws and decrees or appropriate measures (such as budgetary provisions) put in place for the reform to come into effect. It does not, however, evaluate how effectively those legislations or measures are enforced in practice. The next section provides a global overview of the reform momentum in 2015 compared to previous periods. The subsequent section discusses the main challenges faced by countries and reviews actions taken on policy recommendations to address these challenges, with a special focus on developments that have taken place in 2015. The final section discusses the possible impact of recommendations on other important policy objectives, namely the reduction of income inequality as well as of budgetary deficits and current account imbalances. On average across advanced economies, about 14% of the reform recommendations found in the 2015 issue of have been fully implemented (that is, they were met with relevant legislation or significant budgetary provision) in 2015, while 36% were in the process of implementation ( panel A). For emerging economies, although the share of the Going for Growth recommendations that have been fully implemented remained lower than in advanced economies, a higher proportion (44%) was in the process of implementation (Panel B). Taken at face value, these numbers indicate a marked slowdown in the pace of reforms in 2015 relative to the pace observed during the period 2013-14 ( Still, even if one takes into account not only the policy measures fully implemented but also the ones in the process of implementation – which may or may not end up as fully implemented – the pace of reforms would remain below that of the past two years ( full-implementation of in‑process measures About 50 % of the The pace of reform has decelerated in 2015 The chart illustrates the pace of reform in previous periods captured by the indicator of reform responsiveness (RRI) and the estimated level of responsiveness in 2015 based on two different scenarios to ensure comparability with previous two-year periods. See the Going for Growth 20 10 issue for an explanation on RRI, and the main text on how the hypothetical RRI is computed. Following Ollivaud and Schwellnus (2013), the euro area surplus economies are defined as the euro area members for which the current account surplus was on average larger than 1% of GDP over the period 2000-05 (Austria, Belgium, Germany, Finland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands). The euro area deficit economies include the remaining members of the OECD euro area (France, Estonia, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Spain). The actual pace of reform is more likely to lie somewhere between these two cases, confirming the slowdown of the reform momentum observed since the peak of 2011‑12. The deceleration is most apparent in euro area economies, where it is now similar to the pace observed elsewhere. Furthermore, the pace of reform in the euro area (current account) surplus economies continues to be substantially below that of euro area deficits economies. recommendations tended to be higher in countries that faced more difficult macroeconomic conditions – in particular a very high unemployment rate ( ) –such relationship has been less apparent more recently: a high responsiveness has been observed across countries facing diverse macroeconomic conditions. recommendations across the main policy areas. Among the reforms that boost employment, the largest share of recommendations with actions implemented or in the process of implementation is observed in the area of barriers to the labour force participation of women, where action has focused on improving access to childcare services. On the other hand, labour taxation, especially on low-wage earners, is the area where the share of fully implemented recommendations is the highest. In the case of reforms that enhance labour productivity, the area where most action has taken place is education, with an emphasis on upgrading the contents of vocational training, improving teaching quality via revised curriculum and new evaluation system, or increasing provision of early childhood education. In contrast, relatively few actions have been taken in the areas of labour market regulation – where more substantial actions had been seen during the past few years – as well as in the area of innovation support and product market regulation ( Going for Growth 20 A welcome initiative promoting concerted actions to step up the intensity of reforms across major economies has been launched in November 2014 by G20 governments, which have committed to raise their collective GDP by 2018 by an additional 2% through an ambitious package of structural measures and macroeconomic policies (see  ). The structural policies were assessed by the IMF and OECD as contributing more than 2% to G20 GDP by 2018 relative to the baseline if fully implemented. According to the joint assessment by the International Monetary Fund, OECD and World Bank, G20 countries are making progress towards implementing their commitments but more effort is needed for the full and timely implementation that would be needed to meet the GDP objective. In November 2014, the leaders of G20 countries agreed to policies with the aim to lift the G20’s collective GDP by at least 2% above the trajectory implied by the existing policies over the coming five years. All G20 countries submitted Growth Strategies (GS) that consist of macroeconomic policies to stimulate demand in the near term and structural reforms to lift employment and productivity through stronger competition, trade, as well as public and private investment. A wide range of reforms in product and labour markets, investments in public infrastructure, tax reforms and innovation policies were included in the GS. This process was also supported by a joint quantification exercise by the IMF and the OECD that estimated the impact of the specific policy commitments. This estimated that the full implementation of GS would raise the G20’s collective GDP by 2.1 per cent by 2018. The OECD, together with the IMF and World Bank, is also supporting G20 countries to track progress on the commitments and has provided a quantitative assessment of impact of measures implemented before the 2015 G20 Summit in Antalya, Turkey. For the purpose of this review, countries are grouped according to the common nature of the most pressing challenges as identified in the 2015 issue of cases, i.e. countries that could legitimately belong to another group than the one assigned in this exercise. For instance, Finland has been grouped with Austria, Belgium, France, Luxembourg and Slovenia on the basis of challenges such as low labour force participation of older workers and persistently high unemployment. However, it could also be seen as belonging to a group comprising mainly of Nordic countries. Similarly, a few countries only share part of the characteristics on their group. For example, persistently high unemployment is not as big a concern in Austria as it is for other countries in the group. In fact, one country – Iceland – could not be fitted in any group and is not covered in the report. The European countries form four groups, while the rest of the OECD and BRIICS account for another four groups. The EU as such is not considered as a country and not covered in this report, although it is given recommendations in the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Israel, Poland, Latvia advanced OECD countries Highest productivity level among the OECD countries Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Switzerland, United Kingdoms, United States the advanced OECD countries Those countries, particularly hard hit by the crisis, have seen a recovery in output (with Greece being a notable exception) as a substantial reduction in unit labour costs improved their competitiveness. However, their unemployment rate remains painfully high, in particular the incidence of long-term and youth unemployment, which is the highest among OECD countries ( Data for long-term unemployment for Korea refer to 2013. Addressing youth and long-term unemployment requires the mobilisation of a broad range of policies… or ANPAL) that coordinates ALMPs implemented by local authorities and those by the authority of the Ministry of Labour. Measures to ensure more effective monitoring and evaluation of ALMPs are also in the pipeline. Portugal launched in April 2015 the 43 million Euro programme that seeks to improve job prospects for the long-term unemployed over 30 years of age by financing internships in the private sector during six months. The Slovak Republic implemented subsidies to support the first jobs for youth under 29. Furthermore, it is engaging in several reforms to enhance the effectiveness of ALMPs such as establishing a first point contact in Public Employment Services that allows more individualised job-search support or reallocation of labour officers in order to reduce the caseload per officer by half. Other important labour market reforms recommended to those countries would enhance the effectiveness of ALMPs. They include expanding the coverage of unemployment benefits to workers not covered (Greece, Italy and Portugal), narrowing the gap in job protection between regular and non-regular workers (Italy and Spain) and increasing the flexibility of wage formation by reducing further the administrative extension of sectorial bargaining (Portugal and Spain). These countries have been quite active in those areas in recent years: notably Spain and Portugal have been engaging in reforms of employment protection and wage bargaining systems (OECD, 2014a and 2014b). Most recently, Italy introduced a new employment contract with a less costly dismissal procedure, along with the new social insurance for employment extending its coverage while making benefits conditional on participation in active labour market programmes. … together with reforms that increase educational attainment and employability of youth. Raising graduation rates from higher education – while ensuring that the skills acquired better match labour market needs – will also improve youth employment prospects and long-run productivity growth. Common priorities include raising the quality of compulsory education and tertiary education by improving autonomy and accountability of schools and universities. A particularly important related reform is to increase the provision of vocational education and training (VET) with a better curriculum and participation of employers and, beyond schooling, to improve access to job-related training. In Spain, the reform of vocational training programmes mentioned above provides life‑long training opportunities for employed workers. The Slovak Republic introduced a new funding system for secondary vocational schools which allocates funds according to the performance of students in the labour market. ). Stronger competition also fosters the reallocation of jobs from lower- to higher-productivity firms within sectors, thereby improving the allocation of skills (OECD, 2015b; Adalet McGowan and Andrews, 2015). The productivity gain expected from improving the matching between workers’ skills and the skills level required for their job is particularly large in some of these countries ( ). Stronger product market competition would also facilitate labour market reforms (Blanchard and Giavazzi, 2003). This allows for lower unit labour costs which translate into lower prices, improving competitiveness as well as real wages in these countries.     ✓ • Taper UB along duration/reduce age-bias in UB/reduce progressively the combined generosity of UB and other social benefits (i.e. reduce spikes in marginal effective tax rates) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • Increase and/or reform indirect R&amp;D support – tax incentives, seek balance between direct and indirect support ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • R stands for recommendation in that area, A stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. Percentage of workers with skill mismatch and implied gain in productivity from reducing mismatch, selected OECD countries,  2011-12 OECD average (Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Israel, Poland and Latvia) Those countries have most recently enjoyed relatively strong growth led by household consumption and exports. They also benefit from strong trade linkages with more advanced European economies, in particular in the case of the Czech Republic, Slovak Republic and Hungary, which are deeply integrated into their global value chains. Israel boasts a competitive and innovation-intensive manufacturing sector. However, the gap in labour productivity the upper half of OECD countries remains large and with the exception of Poland, convergence has been slow or even stalled since the crisis ( ). Weak productivity in the protected sectors accounts for much of productivity gap and slow catch-up, especially in Israel (OECD, 2016). the upper half of OECD countries In the product market, those countries are recommended to remove red tapes across the board (Hungary and Israel), reduce the scope of public ownership (Czech Republic, Poland and Latvia), and to lower entry barriers in network industries and professional services (Czech Republic, Hungary, Israel, Poland and Latvia). Easing the strictness of regulation in network industries (e.g. energy, telecommunications and transport) as well as in retail and professional services would improve productivity and competitiveness in downstream sectors, not least manufacturing, which use services from these upstream industries as inputs for their own production (Bourles et al., 2010). This The figure compares the impact of regulation in upstream network industries (ETCR) as well as in retail and professional services, on manufacturing sector. The impact indicator is computed using the 2013 definition of PMR indicator and domestic input-output coefficients (except that of Korea which uses US input-output coefficient) and normalised across countries as an index that takes a value between 0 (minimum value across observations) and 1 (maximum value). Data for Latvia are missing. Égert and Wanner (2015), The Regulatory Impact Indicator: the 2013 Vintage Economic Department Working Papers The Czech Republic made an amendment to the Higher Education Act, aimed at increasing the quality of higher education by reforming the accreditation of institution and study programmes. Estonia approved a law introducing quality standards and increasing the visibility of adult training. A system for labour market monitoring and forecasting will be operational in 2016. It also introduced a new grant system for university students which offers flexible conditions and strengthened support to students of poor socio-economic background. With the notable exception of Israel, the intensity of business-based R&amp;D in those countries remains below the level in advanced OECD countries ( The intensity of business-based R&amp;D is low compared to advanced OECD countries  2013 BERD refer to Business expenditure on R&amp;D. Data refer to 2012 for Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain Switzerland and the United Kingdom; 2011 for Australia, Austria, Belgium, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand and the United States. The ICT sector is defined according to the OECD ICT sector definition based on ISIC Rev.4. Data for Latvia are missing. OECD Digital Economy Outlook  Estonia raised the level of tax-free allowance and will allow low-income full-time workers to apply for a tax rebate from 2017. At the same time, taxes on alcohol, fuel and gas are to be raised. Hungary approved a legislation that reduces its flat income tax rate from 16% to 15% from 2016.     ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ Tax system – labour tax wedges ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ R stands for recommendation in that area, A stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. These countries enjoy the highest labour productivity among OECD countries and also a relatively high employment rate thanks to strong labour force participation of women. However, their average working hours remain substantially below the OECD average and a relatively high share of working-age population are receiving disability benefits compared to other OECD countries ( The share of disability benefit recipients is among the highest in OECD countries Percentage of population aged 20-64 years old receiving disability benefits Disability benefits include benefits received from schemes to which beneficiaries have paid contributions (contributory), programmes financed by general taxation (non-contributory) and work injury schemes. The last available year is 2014 for Estonia; 2013 for Australia, Czech Republic, Finland and the United States; 2010 for Spain; 2009 for Mexico; 2008 for Austria, Japan and Korea; 2007 for Canada and France; 2005 for Luxembourg. For 2000, data refer to 2004 for Poland; 2003 for Japan and Mexico; 2002 for the Netherlands; 2001 for Ireland. Countries in this group are recommended to reduce the relatively high corporate and labour income tax rates by shifting the tax burden to property and indirect taxation, such as value-added tax (VAT), and also to remove tax expenditure on owner-occupied housing. The high marginal tax wedge on labour income is hindering the work incentives of low-income households and second-income earners in the Netherlands, while it is discouraging above-average income earners to work longer hours in Sweden (OECD, 2015d). As an example of recent actions in this area, Norway has increased the tax value of secondary homes to 80% of market value and has streamlined tax expenditures while reducing the income tax rates in a step-wise manner. The last available data refer to 2015 Q3 for Canada, Finland, the United Kingdom, Greece, Korea, Norway and the United States; For Chile, data refer to 2002 Q1 and 2014 Q3. The last available year is 2013 for Japan and Switzerland.   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ Tax system – labour tax wedges ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ Broaden the tax base – reduce tax expenditures/subsidies ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. The countries in this group are also enjoying levels of productivity that are among the highest within OECD countries (Slovenia being an exception), but their unemployment rates remain considerably above pre-crisis levels (except Austria), which along with low labour force participation rates and low average working hours, contribute to low overall labour resource utilisation ( the upper half of OECD countries, 2014 In order to encourage more intensive job search, these countries are recommended to reduce the generosity of unemployment benefits as the duration of the spell lengthens and to activate job-search assistance and conditions at an earlier stage of the spell. Furthermore, they also need to reduce labour tax wedges, which are among the highest in OECD countries, and are particularly reducing job opportunities and incentives to take-up work for low-income earners. Austria in its latest tax reform has reduced the bottom statuary income tax rate. Furthermore, earners with income below the first income bracket will be eligible for a reimbursement of half of their social security contributions, up to EUR 400 per year. Encouraging older workers to remain in the labour market requires that a number of measures be taken to raise financial incentives to pursuing activity, but also that the working life evolves along with increases in life expectancy. The most essential reform is to increase the statutory retirement age and to re-design contribution and disbursement of pension so that it does not penalise continued work. Furthermore, these countries need to tighten access to programmes such as unemployment insurance or disability benefits that are often used as pathways to early retirement. On the other hand, provision of activation measures such as job placement services and life-long training are also important to support the attachment of older workers to labour market. Significant pension reforms were put in place during the 2010-12 period, notably to help restore public finance sustainability, but further action is needed to encourage the pursuit of activity at older age. More recent policy actions in this area include: In Belgium, pension age is gradually increased to 67 years by 2030 and incentives for early retirement are being curbed. Finland reoriented the wage subsidy system to those who are in the most difficult labour market situations, namely to the long-term unemployed over 60 years old.     ✓ ✓ ✓ • Taper UB along duration/reduce age-bias in UB/reduce progressively the combined generosity of UB and other social benefits (i.e. reduce spikes in marginal effective tax rates) ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ Tax system – labour tax wedges ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • Broaden the tax base – reduce tax expenditures ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • R stands for recommendation in that area, A stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. While the education systems in those countries yield relatively high performance on average, the individual scores are also strongly influenced by the pupil’s socio-economic background ( PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed. Group 5: Countries with sluggish productivity growth despite relatively high investment in knowledge-based capital (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Switzerland, United Kingdoms and United States) Countries from this group have recently seen a slowdown in growth (except New Zealand and the United Kingdom), as investment remained subdued, contrasting with a comparatively good employment performance. Relatively low rates of youth and long-term unemployment indicate that these countries have generally been successful at keeping lower-skilled workers in the labour force. The flip side is persistently weak productivity growth, in particular gains in multifactor productivity, despite comparatively high investment in knowledge-based capital and a business environment generally favourable to entrepreneurship, in addition to flexible labour markets. At the same time, boosting productivity requires that a number of common structural weaknesses be addressed, in particular in the areas of educational outcomes – to ensure that educational qualification translates into skills – public spending efficiency, tax revenue structure and public infrastructure. The performance of high-school students from these countries in PISA tests in science and reading proficiency is only around the international average and with a tendency in some cases (Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom) to show a high variation across students. These countries need to reduce inequality in access to education at all levels. Increasing the supply and quality of early childhood education and care (ECEC) is of particular importance, as it influences the participation and performance of students at higher education levels. In these countries, expenditure on early childhood education is relatively low, which in some cases is reflected in enrolment rates ( Efforts are made by these countries to expand the supply of, and to raise enrolment in ECEC. For example, the United Kingdom has committed to double the entitlement to free childcare for working families with 3 and 4 year-old children from 2017. Public and private expenditure. The last available year is 2013 for Indonesia. Public expenditure only for Switzerland and public institutions only for Italy, Poland, Portugal and Switzerland. Data for Canada are missing.  2015: Most countries in this group have faced substantial increases in income inequality during the past few decades. In some cases, there is evidence (the United States in particular) that strong investment in ICT and complementary organisational changes have resulted in faster replacement of workers by machines and software to perform specific tasks, while increasing the demand for workers with complementary skills, favouring those with higher skill levels (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011). A wider access to higher education and effective VET programmes can help mitigate the impact of skill-biased technological progress on income inequality. As an example of recent actions in this area, the United States enacted the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act which consolidates job training programmes and aims to streamline services to assist job seekers. This reform involves concentrating resources on programmes that have proved to be effective and become more responsive to business needs. Tax reforms that shifts the burden from direct taxation such as income tax to indirect taxation such as VAT, Goods and Service tax (GST) or property taxation contributes to productivity growth by reducing distortion on labour supply and corporate investments (Arnold et al., 2012). The tax revenue in these countries relies considerably more on income taxation and social security contributions compared to other OECD countries ( ). They have room to expand the role of indirect taxation, for instance, by harmonising the sales tax rate across regions (e.g. in Canada) or introducing environmental taxes. The efficiency of taxation can be also enhanced by broadening tax base and scrapping ill-targeted tax expenditures, such as the deduction of mortgage interest for owner-occupied housing from income taxation (e.g. in the United States). Australia introduced in its 2015-16 Budget several measures to reduce corporate taxation, notably a lower rate of corporate-income for small businesses and a more generous capital write-off rule. Canada introduced some measures to reduce direct taxation, such as increasing the annual contribution limit for Tax-Free Savings Accounts (TFSAs) and a gradual lowering of the small business tax rate from 11% currently to 9% by 1 January 2019. Direct taxes refer to an aggregate of taxes on income, profits and capital gains, social security contributions and taxes on payroll and workforce. The last available year is 2013 for Australia, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands and Poland. Providing effective public services in the face of mounting budgetary pressures while containing tax increases is a challenge shared by many OECD countries, including those from this group. An important reform priority is to enhance the cost efficiency of healthcare while ensuring equity to access. Furthermore, in some countries such as Australia and the United Kingdom, congested and depleted infrastructure calls for an increased provision of infrastructure as well as regulatory reforms that enhance its efficient use such as introduction of congestion fee.   ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • Broaden the tax base – reduce tax expenditures ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • R stands for recommendation in that area, A stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. The United Kingdom, in its Productivity Plan put forth in July 2015, prioritises the upgrading of road network, to be achieved partly by spending GBP 15 billion on new roads over the rest of this decade. It also sets as a target that superfast broadband be made available to 95% of UK households and businesses by 2017. These countries are among those with relatively high rates of investment in knowledge-based capital (KBC), a wide range of intangible assets that includes, beside R&amp;D, data, brand, design, firms-specific skills and quality managerial practices. While KBC is observed to have contributed substantially to GDP growth in advanced OECD countries (Corrado et al., 2012), KBC also generate knowledge spill-overs due to their non-exclusive nature, thereby acting as an important source of productivity growth (OECD, 2013a). Despite their high intensity in KBC investment, the subdued productivity growth suggests that these countries are enjoying only limited return on their investment. ). Lagging productivity in services is contributing to economy-wide labour productivity being significantly below the average of the upper-half of OECD countries (Germany being an exception) ( manufacturing sector = 100, 2014 Business sector services cover distributive trade, repair, accommodation, food and transport services; information and communication; financial and insurance; professional, scientific and support activities. Data refer to 2013 for Belgium, Denmark, France, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Spain, Switzerland, the United States; 2012 for Australia and the United Kingdom. The observation on business sector services in Japan is an estimate based on National Accounts for 2013 and the 2014 JIP Database. The data on manufacturing sector for Israel include mining and quarrying while the data on business sector services include real estate activity. , Cabinet Office (Japan) 2013 National Accounts, Central Bureau of Statistics (Israel) Product, Productivity Compensation of Employed Persons and Capital Return 2005-13 Another challenge shared by these countries is the rapid ageing of population. The share of working-age population plus the older population under the age of 75 in those countries will fall significantly faster than in other OECD countries ( A faster population ageing is expected compared to other OECD countries Korea reviewed nearly 800 regulations and amended the laws underpinning 2 377 regulations under the Regulatory Reform Stringent employment protection on regular workers lowers labour productivity by impeding a smooth reallocation of labour resource (Bassanini et al., 2009). Furthermore, the significant gap in employment protection and training opportunities between regular and non-regular workers has a negative impact on income equality and human capital in those countries, due to the limited mobility from non-regular to regular contracts. These countries thus need to reduce labour market duality by increasing the transparency in dismissal procedure of regular workers while strengthening the job protection and training opportunities of non-regular workers. While there are few reforms in the area of dismissal procedure of regular workers, some steps have been taken to strengthen the social protection of non-regular workers: For instance, Japan is to expand Employees’ Pension Insurance and has extended the coverage of health insurance to 250 thousand non-regular workers beginning from 2016. Germany is considering a reform that limits the duration of employment on jobs filled by temporary work agency workers to 18 months. Those workers are to receive the same remuneration as comparable regular workers after 9 months. Full-time labour participation of women in these countries remains limited for various reasons: fiscal disincentives such as the joint taxation system or benefits and allowances conditional on spouse’s non-employment; high costs, insufficient supply or ill-targeted childcare services; lack of flexibility in working-time arrangement and long working hours that prevent the take up of maternity leave. Duality between regular and non-regular workers also discourages labour participation, given that women are overrepresented in part-time workers (which are mostly non-regular contracts) in these countries (OECD, 2015e). Therefore, reforms to boost women’s full-time participation should extend to multiple dimensions covering tax/benefits system, public services and labour regulations, whereas increasing the supply of childcare facilities or maternity leave alone may not be sufficient.   ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ Expand the coverage of social protection and ALMPs to e.g. non-regular workers ✓ • ✓ Tax system – labour tax wedges ✓ • ✓ Other recommendations (reduce labour tax wedge/disincentives to low income earners’ full-time participation) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • Broaden the tax base – reduce tax expenditures ✓ ✓ • Policy barriers to full-time female participation – other than taxes and benefits ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ R stands for recommendation in that area, A stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. Germany boosted federal expenditure to expand the childcare services supply for children aged 0‑3 years and to raise the quality of childcare, in particular with regards to facilities and equipment. It also abolished the cash-for-care subsidy. Japan is increasing the number of childcare places in order to accommodate about 0.5 million children by March 2018. Also, after-school childcare centres are being created to provide care for 0.3 million children by March 2020. Following several years (or decades in the case of China) of strong growth, these emerging-market economies need to shift to new sources of growth to continue to catch up with advanced economies. Productivity gains driven by resource reallocation away from agriculture to manufacturing, capital deepening, integration into the global trade system and the associated technology transfer have largely run their course. As the productivity gap between those countries and advanced OECD countries remains large, those countries need to step up investment in knowledge-based capital, improve resource allocation and encourage a more widespread development of skills and human capital. ). However, except Russian Federation, their manufacturing exports embody a relatively small share of domestic value-added arising from services, where the value-added created by GVCs is often concentrated (OECD, 2013b). To draw more value-added from their global engagement, these countries need to further improve their capabilities in knowledge and skill-intensive activities within GVCs (such as new product development, manufacturing of core components, or brand development). The index of GVC participation consists of Backward participation, which is the share of foreign value-added embodied in a country’s exports, and Forward participation, which is a country’s value-added embodied in other countries’ exports, as the share of its exports. Backward participation tends to be higher for small countries or those engaging heavily in assembly of final goods (ex: China, Mexico and some central European countries). Forward participation tends to be higher for countries exporting natural resource and base material (ex: Norway or Australia) and those participating in GVC as providers of core components (ex: the United States or Japan). , October 2015.     ✓ • ✓ • ✓ Increase and/or reform indirect R&amp;D support – tax incentives, improve balance between direct and indirect support ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • Reduce the scope for public officials’ interference in decision-making processes/corruption, increase business transparency ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ R stands for recommendation in that area, A stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. Economy-wide productivity growth is shaped importantly by the extent to which more productive firms can grow in size (Bartelsman et al., 2013). Also, reforms that strengthen an economy’s ability to allocate resources to innovative firms magnify the impact of KBC investment, for these firms can act as a larger source of knowledge spill-overs (OECD, 2015b). By reducing further the scope of command and control regulations as well as the weight of state ownership and entry barriers, these countries can better use market mechanisms that reward competitive firms with larger market shares. Such reforms, together with those in financial and labour markets to improve the allocation of skills and capital toward more productive firms, would unleash productivity growth. The Russian Federation enacted the amendments to the anti-corruption law that broadened the categories of public officials forbidden to have foreign bank accounts. Also, Judges’ salaries are to be increased by 30% in 2016. Reforms that remove barriers to labour mobility, such as granting equal access to public services by migrant workers irrespective of their registration status, also boost productivity growth by making it easierfor skilled workers to relocate to higher productivity jobs in urban areas (OECD, 2015e). To this end, China should allow equal access to education for the children of all migrants. Steps are taken as few cities have issued residential permits to migrants. ), and high youth unemployment (especially serious in South Africa) are rooted on various rigidities affecting the formal labour markets: onerous labour regulation and stringent employment protection (e.g. in India and Indonesia); high minimum wage and non-wage hiring costs (e.g. in Colombia, Indonesia, Turkey and South Africa); and stringent regulatory entry barriers and administrative burden that impede entrepreneurship and job creation (e.g. in South Africa). In Turkey, the low statutory retirement age is discouraging formal work at older ages. Data refer to 2009 for Indonesia; 2010 for South Africa and China; 2012 for India. For China, the figure is an official estimate for urban area. Turkey has granted permanent social security contribution cuts and wage subsidies for the employment of young workers. The wages of workers receiving on-the-job vocational training will be paid by the government for six months, and the employer social security contributions for these workers will be fully subsidised for 3½ years, if the training ends up in hiring. Brazil launched the second stage of the Logistics Investment Programme PLI, with planned investments of BRL 70 billion through concessions by 2018. ). This undermines productivity growth but in some cases also contributes to high youth unemployment (e.g. South Africa). There is considerable scope for increasing the resources devoted to education (on a per student basis) and to improve the quality of teachers through more comprehensive training and evaluation programmes. Furthermore, vocational training must be revamped both in supply and quality in order to address the low youth employability and skill shortage. Columbia increased new fellowships for tertiary education and introduced a new system of targeting student loans. It also foresees extending early childhood care to 1.1 million infants as opposed to 400 thousand today. Turkey adopted its Vocational and Technical Education Strategy and Action Plan 2014-18 which includes 24 specific goals to be monitored by performance indicators, including revisions of curricula according to national professional standards. ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Tax system – labour tax wedges ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • ✓ • ✓ ✓ • R stands for recommendation in that area, A stands for any actions that are implemented or in the process of implementation. Global trade growth has slowed and, compared to past trends, is particularly weak relative to GDP growth, which may reflect a structural shift in the relationship between the two aggregates (OECD, 2015f, Constantinescu et al., 2015). Yet, trade plays a fundamental role in the diffusion of technology and access to high-quality imported intermediate goods boosts productivity and competitiveness within GVCs (OECD, 2013b). Therefore, collective efforts to remove structural impediments to international trade, such as non-tariff barriers, are required to boost growth both in the short and in the longer term. Some progress is observed at the global level, and to a lesser extent, at the regional and country levels. At the global level, the negotiation on the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), which contains various provisions for improving the speed and efficiency of border procedures, was concluded in December 2013, followed by the adoption of a Protocol of Amendment in November 2014.The full implementation of the TFA is expected to reduce worldwide trade costs by 12.5 to 17.5% (OECD, 2015g). Furthermore, some important aspects of trade facilitation such as the availability of advanced rulings or streamlining of border and custom procedures strengthen significantly countries’ integration into GVCs via increased use of foreign inputs in exported goods or higher exports of intermediate goods used as inputs in foreign exports (Moïsé and Sorescu, 2015). Another breakthrough came in October 2015, when 12 Asia-Pacific countries reached the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement which covers nearly 40% of the world economy. Aside from the reduction of tariff barriers, the TPP agreement includes provisions that improve intellectual property protection, remove barriers to investment in services, and increase consistency and transparency of regulatory regimes across partner countries. While the immediate impact of the agreement on trade and FDI flows remains uncertain given that many tariffs are abolished only gradually, the prospect of better access to foreign markets may stimulate investment in the relatively short run. In the medium term, stronger competition and increased inward and outward investment are likely to stimulate innovation and productivity growth in previously shielded sectors, namely services and parts of agriculture (Jorgensen et al., 2015). At the regional level, the European Commission has taken a step toward the Digital Single Market by adopting a strategy that lays out legislative process toward further harmonisation in regulations and reduction of administrative burdens concerning cross-border e-commerce and telecom markets. Another strategy related to the Energy Union was also adopted, aiming for a fully integrated European energy market that involves interconnections and a common regulatory framework. While tremendous efforts are required to push through regulatory harmonisation in Europe, the return to such reforms is large, involving substantial boost in trade and FDI across EU countries (Fournier et al., 2015). The harmonisation in service sector is of particular importance, given that it accounts for up to half of the value-added embodied in gross exports. The stringency of regulatory barriers to service trade reduces not only imports but also exports of services, for such restrictions are mainly behind the border and therefore weakens the competitiveness of local firms as well (Nordås and Rouzet, 2015). At the country level, some reforms in the highly protected agriculture sector and energy subsidies have taken place. For instance, Japan has reformed its Agricultural Co-operative system and relaxed some of the limits on corporate farm ownership, steps that may promote competition and boost productivity. Norway raised production-level caps in some agriculture support mechanisms so as to encourage a shift to larger-scale units. Indonesia scrapped subsidies on gasoline and capped those on diesel – a welcome move that contributes both to the efficiency of budget allocation and the environment. However, the administrative price setting regime that replaced subsidies is cumbersome and still inhibits the adjustment of domestic fuel prices to world prices. Furthermore, Indonesia sharply increased import tariffs on food, clothes, cars and other consumer goods, which pushes-up inflation and has a negative impact on household income. During 2015, the highest share of full implementation of structural reforms corresponding to the recommendations made in Going for Growth 2015 ). Among the countries in this group, Italy and Spain have been most active, while the intensive pace of reforms observed in Greece in previous years basically came to a halt in 2015 in part due to the political transition in the first half of the year. Despite a slower share of completed reforms, other country groups could also end-up with a pace of reforms that is comparable to the average observed across OECD countries over the past two years, if preliminary steps in a number of areas are fully implemented. Within each country group, some countries have been more active, for instance Norway (group 3), France (group 4) and Japan (group 6). In the case of the two country groups comprising emerging-market economies (groups 7 and 8), relatively few reforms have been fully implemented but initial action has been taken on a substantial number of recommendations, in particular in China, India and Mexico. Going for Growth 20 15 by the status of their implementation at the end of 2015. Full implementation refers to legislation of relevant laws or equivalent measures. Going for Growth 20 Many of the recommendations made in the 2015 issue of , column 1). However, some reforms encouraging the labour participation of low income earners and low-skilled workers can lead to higher wage dispersion at the lower end of the distribution. Other reforms enhancing competition and innovation are often found to be associated with wider earning gaps (OECD, 2011), partly through their role in stimulating skilled-biased technology changes. This underscores the importance that such reforms be complemented with measures to facilitate worker’s up-skilling and reduce skill mismatch, such as better provisions of vocational trainings and lifelong learning programmes.         ~ ~ ~ -/~ +/~ -/~ -/~ ~     -/~   -/~ ~   -/~ ~ +/~   ~ Across the ten OECD countries facing the highest degree of income inequality, the number of reforms implemented or in the process of being implemented that are likely to reduce inequality is twice as high as those that are more likely to increase them ( In many OECD countries, not least those with a very high level of government debt relative to GDP, the need to pursue public finance consolidation remains high, especially those where population ageing is likely to put additional budgetary pressures. Under a stylised scenario of interest rates normalisation and a rising expenditure on healthcare, long-term care and pension, government debt ratios are expected to rise in about two-third of OECD countries even in the case where interest rates remain at par with GDP growth rates from 2020 onward (OECD, 2015a). And the debt dynamic gets worse in the case where interest rates exceed GDP growth ( recommendations generally contribute to fiscal consolidation in the long run – in particular those that boost private-sector employment (OECD, 2013c) – some of them are associated with non-negligible up-front increases in public expenditure (or declines in revenues) and their implementation can thus pose challenge to fiscal consolidation in the short run ( , column 2). Countries with very limited budgetary room may have to focus on low-cost measures or ensure that others are financed through means that are as friendly as possible to employment and growth. The short-run impacts on fiscal expenditure can be also mitigated by implementing in tandem reforms that enable fiscal savings. An example of such Government debt levels will likely rise in a majority of OECD countries with normalisation of interest rates and population ageing Debt level in 2014 and simulated debt levels in 2030, The chart compares the government debt level in 2014 and the simulated level in 2030 under two alternative scenarios on the evolution of the interest rate and the GDP growth rate. See the source for the details of assumptions made in the simulation. OECD (2015),  Among the ten OECD countries with the largest primary deficits and the highest government debt levels, the majority of reforms implemented or in the process of implementation are likely to put short-term pressures on the budgetary balance ( The 10 OECD countries with the largest fiscal imbalance are chosen on basis of an index that combines the standardised value of cyclically-adjusted primary balance deficits (percentage of potential GDP) and of government debt (percentage of GDP). They are: Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Canada, Ireland, Belgium, Slovenia, Spain and the Netherlands. While current account imbalances declined substantially after the crisis, about one half of the decline is explained by cyclical factors, namely large contractions in domestic demand on the back of bursting housing bubbles in a number of deficit countries (Ollivaud and Schwellnus, 2013). The narrowing of cyclically-adjusted global current account imbalances reflects a substantial narrowing for all major trading areas except the euro area, where the cyclically-adjusted balance of surplus countries continued to widen while that of deficit countries narrowed by about one percentage point ( ).This underscores the importance of removing the institutional distortions that alter households’ saving behaviour or return to private investment. For deficit countries, reforms in labour and product markets that reduce labour or business costs may also help to reduce imbalances by improving competitiveness. The chart decomposes the headline current account imbalances to the component explained by business and housing cycle and the non-cyclical component. Following Ollivaud and Schwellnus (2013), the euro area surplus countries are defined to include euro area members for which the current account surplus was on average larger than 1% of GDP over the period 2000-05 (Austria, Belgium, Germany, Finland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands). The euro area deficit zone includes the remaining members of the OECD euro area (France, Estonia, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Spain). Updated calculations based on P. Ollivaud and C. Schwellnus (2013), "The Post-crisis Narrowing of International Imbalances: Cyclical or Durable?” OECD suggests that reducing the minimum costs of labour by reforming worker’s bargaining power help deficit countries to rebalance the non-cyclical component of imbalances. Similarly, cutting back subsidies or tax incentives that lead to excessive consumption or investment in specific products may also help. For countries with a large current account surplus, regulatory reforms and fiscal supports that boost investment in physical and knowledge-based capital as well as higher investment in public infrastructure can contribute to reducing the structural component of the current account. Furthermore, promoting the full-time labour force participation of women and older workers may also work towards rebalancing by increasing income of those groups and thereby reducing the need for precautionary or retirement saving. The group of countries with the largest external imbalances are the 10 countries selected on the basis of an index that combines the standardised value of current account deficits (averaged over 2010-14) and external debt (both as percentage of GDP) and the 10 countries with the largest current account surplus. The largest deficit countries are: Greece, Turkey, Portugal, Poland, New Zealand, Australia, Spain, Latvia, Colombia and the Slovak Republic, while the largest surplus countries are: Norway, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Germany, Denmark, Luxembourg, Korea, Russian Federation and Slovenia. times – i.e. in the presence of a sizeable negative output gap and persistently weak demand – as well as under different assumptions regarding the availability or effectiveness of macroeconomic policies in supporting the reforms. In doing so the chapter focuses on the key channels through which different reforms influence short-term activity via the main components of demand and discusses how these channels operate under different macro conditions. : More specifically, public infrastructure investment that effectively increases the growth potential in the medium term (e.g. high-speed broadband network) can stimulate private investment in the short term. Reforming rules restricting the entry of new suppliers (exclusive rights) and the capacity of existing suppliers to compete (fees control) in services characterised by relatively low entry costs (e.g. professional services, taxis, etc.) can yield positive short-term gains in employment and domestic demand. In contrast, the risks that reforms fail to lift activity in the short run – or that they even further depress demand – are highest in the case of reforms that initially put downward pressures on wages or mark-ups, such as reforms of employment protection legislation, minimum wages or product market regulation in network industries. A number of measures could help mitigate those risks: Significant progress has been achieved in cleaning the banking sector balance sheet following the crisis. However, the share of non-performing loans in the banking system remains relatively high in a number of euro area countries. In fact, the relative speed at which banks’ balance sheets were consolidated in the United States may have helped support the faster recovery. . More complete information, including the review of case studies, can be found in Caldera Sánchez, de Serres and Yashiro (2016). For instance, such concern has been raised and debated in the context of reforms introduced at a time when monetary policy is constrained due to nominal interest rates hitting the zero lower bound (Eggertson, Ferrero and Raffo, 2014; Fernández-Villaverde, 2014; Vogel, 2014). More generally, the experience of southern euro area countries, which have implemented significant reforms in a context of aenemic domestic and external demand as well as without the support of macro policies, has led to renewed interest in better understanding the links between reforms and demand and raised questions about the timing, sequencing and packaging of reforms. times, i.e. with the economy operating close to potential and with available support of macroeconomic policies. It identifies the main channels through which structural reforms influence short-term activity through consumption, investment and net exports. The subsequent section then focuses on the case where reforms are introduced in times, i.e. with a sizeable negative output gap and persistently weak demand, and examines how the more adverse environment influences the relative strengths of the main channels. The final section goes one step further and considers cases where reforms are implemented in a weak conjuncture and under constrained macro policies. by constraining the scope and speed of real variables to adjust to the policy change. Third, well-functioning financial markets play a key role in bringing forward the gains from reforms by funding the necessary investment and allowing for income smoothing both in anticipation of future gains and to offset temporarily income loses (OECD, 2012). Mainstream models predict a number of channels of transmission through which structural reforms affect the main components of demand. The key channels include i)  effects which bring forward future reform-driven income gains in current consumption and investment, notably through rising asset prices and positive confidence channels, ii)  for households and firms that are liquidity or cash-flow constrained, i.e. that do not have access to borrowing from banks or other financial institutions iii)  effects arising from households’ and firms’ perception of heightened (or diminished) income and profit insecurity, which come through the precautionary motive for saving and iv) a which captures inter-temporal substitution effects: by making the holding of financial assets more attractive, a rise in the real interest rate induces a decline in current consumption in favour of higher savings. In addition, some reforms have budgetary implications when not introduced in a budget-neutral way and will affect demand through a fiscal multiplier effect. In what follows, the discussion considers mainly budget‑neutral reforms. . This analysis essentially comes from studies that simulate the impact of reforms, in particular based on dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models. There are also a few empirical studies looking at changes in policy indicators to define structural reform episodes and to estimate their short-term effects (Bouis et al., 2012). In any case, the empirical literature looking at the short-term effect of reforms mostly refer to normal times, that is when macro policies can react to short-term demand developments. Therefore, when macro stimulus is not available, demand effects are likely to be stronger than in normal times after a reform. The main results from model-based and empirical analysis can be summarised as follows: Model-based analysis of this class of reforms generally indicate positive, albeit moderate, short-term impacts on consumption and output (Cacciatore, Duval and Fiori, 2012; Barkbu et al., 2012). One study shows that in the case of reform to employment protection legislation, the lower firing costs may lead to an increase in unemployment and a reduction in demand in the initial year after the reform but this effect is quickly reversed in subsequent years (Cacciatore, Duval and Fiori, 2012). In contrast, the evidence from reduced-form empirical analysis points to the absence of significant positive impacts on demand from reforms to employment protection legislation or wage bargaining in the first few years (Bouis et al., 2012). The evidence from reduced-form analysis indicates that reducing the share of direct taxes in overall tax revenue is found to quickly reduce unemployment, particularly for youth, to boost female and youth participation and private investment growth (Bouis et al., 2012). A special case of a growth-enhancing tax reform for countries in a monetary union is the so-called fiscal devaluation, which typically takes the form of a reduction in employer’s social security contributions combined with an increase in the value-added tax rate. Empirical evidence points to a positive, but short-lived effect, on employment and net exports, with long-term GDP gains reflecting essentially productivity improvements (Johansson et al., 2008; Koske, 2013). The evidence from both model-based simulations (e.g. Cacciatore, Duval and Fiori, 2012) and reduced-form estimates (Bouis et al., 2012) suggests that lowering unemployment benefits in normal conditions yields positive gains in consumption and overall demand within 2-3 years. In most studies, reforms of unemployment benefits are found to have a significantly stronger positive short-term impact on demand and output than reforms to wage bargaining and employment protection legislation. Model-based evidence indicates that an increase in retirement age is most likely to have a positive effect on demand in the short run via lower private saving due to life-cycle motives (Karam et al., 2010; Barrell et al., 2009). This is corroborated by reduced-form analysis, which shows a positive impact on consumption, investment and GDP (Bouis et al., 2012). The evidence on the impact of pension reforms is less clear in the cases of benefit reductions or increases in contribution rates as their effect is similar to a fiscal contraction, albeit a deferred one. They are found to stimulate private saving in the short run, but may also boost investment through anticipation of reduced public debt (Karam et al., 2010). In the case of a budgetary-neutral reform of active labour market policies (ALMPs), the effect is found to be similar to that of a tightening of unemployment benefits (Cacciatore, Duval and Fiori, 2012), except that by lowering firms’ search costs or the costs of initial training, they may stimulate labour demand somewhat more rapidly. By and large, model-based evidence points to modest short-term GDP gains from product market reforms, with more visible impacts appearing after 2-3 years (Anderson et al., 2014); (Barkbu et al., 2012). Evidence from reduced-form empirical analysis based on aggregate data shows no significant short-term impact on GDP, except for a decline in the initial year, due to a temporary drop in investment (Bouis et. al., 2012). Evidence based on sector-level data indicates that productivity gains can be achieved after 2-3 years (Bourlès et al., 2013; Dabla-Norris et al., 2015). The overall results at the aggregate level may mask very different outcomes depending on whether barriers to competition are lowered in manufacturing or service sectors, and within services whether the reforms affect primarily network industries (e.g. energy, telecoms and transport) or professional services, where regulatory barriers to entry and strict conduct regulation may create strong latent demand. The short-term effects of structural reform in one area may depend in part on initial policy and institutional settings in other areas. However, the evidence is inconclusive to the extent that it is difficult to empirically identify how interactions between policy settings and reforms affect outcomes (e.g. Bassanini and Duval, 2009; Bouis et al., 2012). For instance, model-based simulations by Cacciatore et al. (2012) find that gains in the aftermath of product market reforms would be quicker if initially job protection is less stringent and unemployment benefits are low. That is because when entry barriers fall, new jobs are filled more quickly, minimising the risks of lengthy unemployment spells for laid-off workers. On the other hand, findings from reduced-form empirical analysis show that under initially weak job protection a relaxation of product market regulation leads to higher unemployment and lower employment (Bouis et al., 2012). a package of labour and product market reforms that is sufficiently broad can induce a faster adjustment and alleviate the transitional costs of certain reforms (Anderson Hunt and Snudden, 2014; Cacciatore et al., 2012; Everaert and Schule, 2008, Gomes et al., 2013). For instance, (Cacciatore et al., 2012) find that a combination of product market, job protection and unemployment benefit reforms boosts GDP, employment and wages immediately, in contrast with the effects of some of these reforms taken in isolation. Early announcement and credible commitment to future reforms can help bring forward the gains from reforms by fostering investment and consumption today. Adjémian et al., (2007) find that announcing product market reforms in advance can trigger an immediate response by firms, accelerating the upside adjustment in investment and output even before the reform is actually implemented. theoretical studies suggest that outcomes might be better if reforms were sequenced, with product market reforms preceding labour market reforms (Blanchard and Giavazzi, 2003). Reforming product markets first can also lower the resistance to labour market reforms by reducing rents and facilitate their subsequent implementation. Another political argument for gradualism is that as governments have a fixed amount of political capital, it is best if they allocate their scarce resources to one set of reforms at a time (Coeuré, 2014). However, too long a time lag between reforms might not be desirable. For instance, in the case of New Zealand’s reforms in the 1980s a significant time lag (about five years) between the liberalisation of product markets and labour market reforms mitigated the potential overall gains from reforms (Caldera Sánchez, de Serres and Yashiro, 2016). Recent empirical analysis has found that incremental labour market reforms tend to raise household income instability while bolder reforms do not, increasing the risk of resistance and reversal in the former case (Cournède et al., 2015).   2006). Stronger competition also leads to the exit of least productive firms. In normal economic conditions, displaced resources are absorbed eventually by new entrants, more competitive firms that are expanding production or by other sectors. As a result of more efficient resource allocation, aggregate productivity increases and as lower prices stimulate demand employment is also expected to increase. However, when the economy is in a slump, demand may respond less to the lower prices resulting from competition. In such context, displaced resources are expected to remain unemployed for longer as a bleaker profit outlook and credit constraints slows the entry of new firms or the expansion of incumbent firms (Lee and Mukoyama, 2015; Barlevy, 2003; EC, 2013). Reforms that drive wages down and increase product market competition can boost competitiveness and net exports but their ultimate impact on aggregate demand may be muted in an environment of weak external demand, such as a global downturn. Conversely, Canada, Germany and Sweden have in the past introduced major reforms in a context of weak domestic demand but benefited from robust global trade growth helping to revive their economies relatively quickly (Caldera Sánchez, de Serres and Yashiro, 2016). The lower (upper) line corresponds to the impact of the reduction in the initial unemployment benefit replacement rate during economic downturn (upturn), where the economic cycle is measured through the level of the pre-reform unemployment gap (i.e. the difference between the structural unemployment rate and the unemployment rate). The economic downturn (upturn) corresponds to the case where the unemployment gap is set to the minimum (maximum) value within the sample. Bouis et al. (2012). Other reforms aimed at increasing labour supply are also likely to be less effective in boosting employment and may even be contractionary when labour demand is weak. For instance, tax reforms to remove the fiscal disincentives to second earner’s labour participation (such as reduction of spousal tax credits) or reforms that tighten access to disability benefits may not increase employment much if implemented in a context of weak demand, given that the targeted groups may face even more difficulties in finding work than the other unemployed. Instead, they may lower private consumption by reducing household disposable income, if the measure is introduced also to generate budgetary savings. Indeed, one factor contributing to the higher risk of a negative impact of reforms is the potential increase in skills and geographical mismatches, combined with the heightened pressures on resources devoted to job-search assistance and training programmes. Even though evidence on mismatches is not always easy to interpret, increasing mismatches are a recurrent concern during cyclical downturns insofar as the impact differs across industries and regions (OECD, 2011). In such a case, a depressed housing market may slow geographical mobility, in particular where mobility is already hampered by housing and rental market policies that create high transaction costs (Andrews et al., 2011). Also, active labour market policies that focus on the least employable workers may be less effective in downturns. Reinforcing job-search assistance may not help in this case as the probability of reemployment does not depend so much on search efforts when there is a lack of jobs (Boeri et al., 2015). Hence, there may be a case for shifting the focus on workers early in the unemployment spells as the chances to find a job are higher. Insofar as competition for jobs is fiercer in weaker labour markets, active labour market programmes that focus on some workers may improve the search ability of those workers by reducing the relative job-search success of others (Crépon et al. 2013; Michaillat, 2012). A meta-analysis of impact estimates of studies of active labour market programmes by Card, Kluve and Weber (2015) suggests that they are more likely to show positive impacts in a recession. The effectiveness of fiscal policy may be enhanced during recessions due to higher multiplier effects (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2013; Blanchard and Leigh, 2013). During a recession government spending is less likely to cause an increase in the interest rate and crowd out private consumption and investment, provided long-term fiscal sustainability is not at risk. Similarly, the increase in the proportion of liquidity-constrained firms and households who have a higher propensity to consume out of their income makes fiscal policy more effective during a downturn (Galí et al., 2007), especially during a financial crisis or when the financial sector is weak (Corsetti et al., 2012). The largest short-run impact on aggregate demand is likely to come from government spending measures rather than from tax cuts (e.g. Mineshima et al., 2014). This is largely because spending measures have a direct impact on aggregate demand while tax reductions will have a muted effect if they are saved because of, for instance, high uncertainty. In practice, fiscal stimulus measures can be designed on both the spending and tax side to have a rapid and substantial multiplier effect. Among spending measures, public investment is usually found to be the most powerful instrument (Röhn, 2010). Boosting investment in public infrastructure is a typical way to boost demand during a downturn, as it pulls demand today, as opposed to other investments (e.g. R&amp;D or education) that need longer to pay off. An increase in public infrastructure investment boosts aggregate demand via two channels, first, through the short-term fiscal multiplier, and second, by crowding in private investment. Indeed, evidence suggests that the positive short-term effect on demand is even stronger when there is economic slack – less crowding out of private investment –, and monetary policy is accommodative IMF (2014). Furthermore, the productivity gains from infrastructure shocks are significantly higher during downturns (Dabla-Norris et al., 2015). In the European Union, removing financial barriers and harmonising regulations, in particular in the area of network industries, would help achieve a higher return on investment. Some tax reductions can also be put in place to increase household disposable income and boost spending in the short term. While in theory consumption should not respond much to temporary changes in taxes, as consumers are likely to spread out their consumption over their lifetimes, evidence suggests that in some cases temporary tax reductions can be effective in boosting consumption spending in the short term. For instance, the income tax rebates the US federal government enacted in 2001 and 2008 as part of its economic stimulus packages significantly boosted spending in the short term, especially for households with low liquid wealth or low income (Johnson et al., 2006; Parker et al., 2013). The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 gave tax rebates to most US households over a ten-week period from late July to the end of September 2001. The Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 consisted primarily of a USD 100 billion programme of tax rebates to approximately 130 million US tax filers. Reductions in labour taxes or social security contributions targeted to lower-income workers, can also increase aggregate demand in the short term, as spending by this group is closely tied to their disposable income (De Mooij and Keen, 2013). The scope for expansionary fiscal policy may, however, be limited when long-run fiscal constraints are significant. An increase in government spending (or tax cuts) in countries with high debt levels may act as a signal that fiscal tightening will be required in the near future. The anticipation of such adjustment could have a contractionary effect – through for instance adverse effects on financial markets, interest rates and consumer spending – that would offset the short-term expansionary effects. Ricardian behaviour, implying that fiscal stimulus is at least partly offset through an increase in private sector savings, is stronger the higher the level of government debt (Röhn, 2010). Moreover, in a financial crisis, debt financed spending expansions might reinforce a negative feedback loop between bank and government balance sheets when government debt is high. Monetary and fiscal policies may be limited in various ways in practice, making it difficult to smooth the transitional dynamics associated with structural reforms. This section discusses the short-run impacts of structural reforms when weak demand is compounded by three types of constraints: monetary policy has hit the zero lower bound and has to rely on unconventional monetary tools; participation in a monetary union; and fiscal policy is constrained by consolidation requirements or legislated bounds on the fiscal deficit. The zero lower bound (ZLB) brings an additional channel through which structural reforms may lower demand and output in the short run, namely an increase in the real interest rate. In principle, structural reforms that boost aggregate supply can, in a weak demand environment, have a negative impact in the short run by putting downward pressures on prices and inflation expectations if the monetary policy stimulus cannot be increased. The inability of the monetary authority to adjust nominal interest rates in response to falling expectations would push up the real interest rate, further depressing rather than stimulating aggregate demand (Eggertsson et al., 2014; Fernández-Villaverde, 2014). Furthermore, other factors will contribute to mitigate the potential adverse real interest rate effect, even in the case of reforms that do result in rising real interest rates. First, liquidity-constrained households will not be very sensitive to the real interest rate increases but will benefit from falling price levels (Vogel, 2014). Second, insofar as the reforms yield competitiveness gains, increases in net exports will help mitigate the downward pressures on domestic demand, although this may not be sufficient to offset the impact of higher real interest rates (Eggertsson et al., 2014). Third, reforms leading to a price level adjustment need not create disinflationary expectations if the change is bold and implemented in a short time period rather than incremental and introduced gradually (Coeuré, 2014). In the case where private sector debt deleveraging is a major factor contributing to the weakness of demand, it has been shown that under the presence of collateral constraints and long-term debt contracts product market reforms may have a positive impact on output and employment even in the short run despite their deflationary effect (Andrés, Arce and Thomas, 2014). However, the effect of labour market reforms in the same circumstances are less favourable. On the other hand, fiscal devaluations – a reduction of employer’s social security contributions combined with an increase in value-added (VAT) tax rate – is a type of measure that may have more traction for countries in a monetary union, in particular as a means to boost competitiveness and exports in the short run. As mentioned above, a fiscal devaluation is a special case of a reform that shifts taxation from more distortive (direct) sources to less distortive (indirect) ones. Such shifts have been found to yield permanent gains in output and productivity levels in the longer run. An additional competitiveness channel operates in the short term in the case of a monetary union, as long as not too many members introduce a similar reform at the same time, in which case the impact on net exports of each is diminished. With nominal wages fixed in the short run, a reduction in social security contributions rates lowers labour costs. If the fall in labour costs is passed on into prices, both export and domestic good prices fall leading to a boost in competitiveness. By contrast, the higher VAT only bears on domestic and import goods, but not on exports and, therefore will not dampen the positive effect on competitiveness and net exports. The magnitude of the short-run benefits of a fiscal devaluation is, however, uncertain. Model-based simulations suggest that fiscal devaluations have beneficial, but moderate, short-term effects on net exports, output and employment (Koske, 2013). For instance, for Portugal, a fiscal devaluation of 1% of GDP would lift net exports by 0.1% of GDP in the first year of the reform (EC, 2011). By contrast, econometric estimates for the euro area show much larger effects in the short run, of an immediate impact on net exports of up to 4% of GDP for a 1% GDP shift in revenues (De Mooij and Keen, 2013). Given the uncertainty surrounding the short-term benefits, a fiscal devaluation cannot thus be a substitute for more fundamental reforms of labour and product markets to sustainably boost competitiveness, but can help sustain demand in the short term. An expansionary fiscal policy can compensate the lack of support from monetary policy in addressing the demand shortfall, especially for euro area countries which cannot expect an expansionary monetary policy by the ECB to accommodate their individual reforms. However, the fiscal space in many OECD countries has been limited either because they have to engage in fiscal consolidation, face high debt financing costs or their fiscal balances are bound by rules. Indeed, for several countries needing to put public finances on a sustainable path, fiscal policy has been contractionary until recently. Negative impacts of fiscal consolidation are likely to be more pronounced during weak demand times as fiscal multipliers are significantly larger during economic recessions than expansions (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2013). Tight fiscal conditions and a limited ability of the government to cushion the transitory costs for losers may increase some of the contractionary effects of structural reforms in the short run (Duval, 2008). For instance, reforms that increase flexibility in employment protection and wage formation can negatively impact private consumption if governments cannot mitigate the increase in income risks with an expansion of unemployment benefits or active labour market policies (ALMPs). Fiscal constraints are particularly a concern if they undermine the ability of countries to carry out structural reforms that entail higher spending (e.g. in ALPMs, R&amp;D or childcare), less revenue (e.g. labour taxes), or up-front public spending, for instance through transfer schemes, to compensate reform losers. Furthermore, they can also reduce the feasibility of growth-enhancing structural policies that could enhance short-term as well as long-term growth, such as high-quality infrastructure investment. The urgency in the fiscal situation may bias structural reforms toward those that realise fiscal savings rapidly, but may be contractionary in the short run. An example of such reforms is a reduction in welfare expenditure that for example took place in New Zealand in the early 1990s amid the strong need for fiscal consolidation (Caldera Sánchez, de Serres and Yashiro, 2016). While a strong pressure to reduce public spending may facilitate the implementation of reforms to public-sector administration and services, the success of the reforms in terms of raising cost-effectiveness and quality may be undermined if priority needs to be given to immediate budgetary savings. Some reforms can be expansionary even under relatively weak demand and constrained macroeconomic policies if they encourage investment or generate rapid job gains: . Reducing entry barriers in service sectors with large pent-up demand and low entry costs can unleash the entry of new firms, boosting investment and job creation relatively fast. Simulations for Italy show that half of the gains of reforms that facilitate the entry of new firms in the service sector would be realised within three years (Forni et al., 2010). Case studies have also found that liberalisation in sectors such as retail trade and telecommunications often resulted in fast decreases in prices and increases in output and employment (Bertrand and Kramarz, 2002; Faini et al., 2006; Skuterud, 2005). Another example is professional services that remain heavily regulated in many countries (i.e. legal, accounting, engineering and architecture professions), especially as regards entry regulations ( : By improving the sustainability of public finances, credible reforms in pensions and healthcare systems can boost consumption today through wealth effects and reduced need for precautionary saving. Empirical studies have, indeed, shown that the risk of unexpected healthcare expenditure is an important motive of precautionary saving, and policies that improve access to medical insurance increase consumption (Gruber and Yelowitz, 1999; Jappelli et al., 2007; Bai and Wu, 2014). However, such reforms may be less effective in reducing precautionary saving if the volatility of income and the risk of unemployment is very high (Mody et al., 2012). Product market reforms that reduce the economy-wide administrative burdens on firms and reduce the initial cost of starting-up a business can also improve expectations on future business conditions. For instance, simulations suggest that reforms to reduce the initial costs of starting-up a business implemented during the crisis in Italy, Portugal and Spain have significantly raised the birth rate of firms in those countries (Ciriaci, 2014). 2008 data instead of 2013. [1] and Gomes et al. (2013) [2] [3] [4] , Varga and in’t Veld (2014) [5] Varga, Roeger and in’t Veld (2013) [6] and Arpaia et al.,(2007) [7]. include Anderson et al.,(2014), [8] Barkbu et al., (2012) [9] [10] , Karam et al., (2010) [11] [12] [13] include Bouis et al., (2012) [14] , Fiori et al., (2012) [15] [16] . For example, Bouis et al., (2012) estimate average impulse responses in terms of employment and output after one to five years following different types of structural reforms (e.g. product market reforms), based on a panel data of OECD countries over the period 1983 to 2007. include Bourlès et al., (2013) [17] and Dabla-Norris et al., (2015) [18] . The latter estimates the impulse response mostly in terms of productivity after three years and five years following several types of structural reforms, based on a panel data of 23 industries in 11 advanced economies over the period 1970-2007. While the estimation of reduced-form equations allows for a flexible empirical specification and the assessment of the impact of a wide array of reforms, it does not identify the channels through which reforms affect output or employment. Furthermore, the often incremental nature of reforms makes it difficult to clearly identify the short-run impacts. Estimations are also prone to specification error. For instance, a failure to control for the possible complementarity across reforms can bias the estimated impacts of a given reform (Bassanini and Duval, 2009 [19] include Neumark et al., ( [20] Anton and Muñoz de Bustillo (2011) [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] Kugler and Pica (2008) assess the consequences of Italy’s legislation that strengthened the protection of regular employment for firms with less than 19 employees. [26] [27] Crépon et al., (2005) [28] [29] which report significant impact on unemployment duration. Less favourable finding is reported for instance by Crépon et al., (2013) [30] [31] Cribb et al., (2014) [32] that observed the consequences of a UK reform raising women’s pension eligibility age on their labour supply and unemployment rate. [33] [34] [35] Faini et al., (2006) [36] ([1], [2] [1], [2] [14] [20], [21] [22] [12] [14] ). No evidence of significant positive effect in the five-year horizon. Some evidence of negative effects on productivity and output at the 2-3 years horizon ( [18] [23] [24] [25] [5] [12] [14] [26], [27] [5], [12] [8], [9] [14] [28] [29], [31] [11] [14] [32] Upward pressures on consumption through positive disposable income (lower prices and gains in employment) and wealth effects. Downward pressures if lower mark-ups and prices lead to high real interest rates (e.g. in monetary union) or if business restructuring initially lead to high job turnover and income instability and hence higher precautionary saving. Modest short-term GDP gains with more visible impacts after 2‑3 years ( [8] [9] ). Slowly rising gains in investment and (to a lesser extent) consumption (prompted by real wage gains) and negative contribution from net exports. Employment rises in services but falls in manufacturing. One study finds consumption falling in the 2-3 years horizon due to higher real interest rate ( [12] [14] . Evidence from sector-level data indicates productivity gains within 2-3 years on average [17] but one study finds that the impact on productivity in professional services is negative in the first 2‑3 years but turns positive after 5 years [18] [33] [34] [35] [36] [36]) [6] [8] [14] ). Strong positive impact found on net exports in euro area countries but smaller effect in non-euro area OECD countries ( [16] . For instance, [1] corresponds to ECB (2015). Real GDP has tended to grow by more than real household income in the majority of OECD countries between the mid-1990s and 2013. This growth gap is partly due to factors having little policy traction, such as differential developments between the price of domestic output and the price of consumption faced by domestic households, driven notably by terms-of-trade effects: consumption prices have tended to rise relative to output prices in most OECD countries over the period, the only exceptions being commodity exporters such as Norway, Australia and Canada. The household income share of GDP, simply defined as the ratio of nominal household disposable income over nominal GDP, has been stable over the period, on average across OECD countries, but with cross-country heterogeneity, with for instance a large decline in Austria and Korea and a large increase in the Slovak Republic and Finland. About half of OECD countries have experienced a decline in the labour share of GDP, in particular Portugal, Slovenia and Japan, while the other half have experienced an increase, though of a lower magnitude. The vast majority of OECD countries have experienced a decline in the household capital income share of GDP, in particular Belgium and Italy, while only a few countries, including Portugal and the United States, have seen an increase. The decline in the household capital income share of GDP could be overstated to the extent that the corporate sector has been reducing the use of dividends in favour of alternative profit redistribution mechanisms to shareholders, such as share buybacks – and that associated capital gains are not recorded in macroeconomic data. The vast majority of OECD countries experienced an increase in the household secondary income share of GDP over the past two decades, i.e. in the share of production income that is being redistributed by the government to the household sector. However, this largely reflects the increases in public income transfers over the early phases of the crisis, which cushioned household incomes from the fall in GDP. The analysis did not reveal clear links between the changes in income distribution at the macro-level and the rise in income inequality within the household sector experienced by many OECD countries over the last decades. GDP per capita is a widely used measure of living standards and a key headline indicator of economic performance. The emphasis given to GDP growth relies on the assumption that higher GDP per capita is associated with rising living standards for most households. This view has been increasingly challenged. On its own, GDP per capita falls short of accurately measuring people’s wellbeing, even from a narrow material living standard perspective. to households. Yet this is of primary relevance from a wellbeing perspective, as recognised for instance by the Stiglitz Commission (Stiglitz et al. 2009). The chapter is structured as follows: the first section describes the measurement framework used throughout the chapter, based on the System of National Accounts (SNA). The second section delivers a snapshot overview of developments in real household income compared to GDP over the last two decades. It also sheds light on the drivers that are, in principle, least amenable to policy intervention, e.g. differential developments between the prices faced by households and those of domestic output and primary income flows with the rest of the world. The third section analyses how income generated from domestic production is distributed between the household and non-household sectors of the economy, in particular the general government and the corporate sector, with a focus on the functional income distribution, in other words on income distribution between labour and capital. The fourth section delivers an assessment of the link between income distribution across household and non-household sectors and income distribution within the household sector. This is considered as the best available measure of material conditions from a cross-country perspective, although it may not be fully reflective of households’ command over economic resources ( Households benefit from the services supplied by general government, such as healthcare, education, housing, recreational and cultural services, but associated transfers are not spendable. The national accounts attribute to household income an imputed value for such services, i.e.  Households in OECD countries have on several occasions in the recent past benefited from rises, or suffered from falls, in the prices of these two types of assets; for instance during the stock market bubble toward the end of the 1990s, and the steep drop in stock prices starting in 2000 and more recently, during the housing market bubble. Asset price changes induce positive or negative wealth effects, allowing household to consume more or less than their disposable income. These so-called “wealth effects “may play a major role in households’ perception of own economic resources, but they cannot be inferred from national accounts. Against this background, household capital income as defined in this chapter based on the SNA excludes capital gains and losses, whether realised or not. Income from housing assets is included insofar as it reflects actual and imputed rents (the latter accruing to homeowner occupiers). Financial income covers interest received on households’ financial investments and dividends paid by companies to households but, due to the exclusion of capital gains, other forms of financial income are excluded from the SNA. Such is the case of share buy-backs, which have been playing a growing role in corporate profit redistribution strategy. This income transfer from firms to households is not recorded in the household income account. Finally and related to the previous point, the impact of the external sector on household income in the SNA covers essentially primary income, that is, income from work, dividends and interest. Financial transactions with the rest of the world do not affect household income nor do they affect GDP. By contrast, such transactions affect the balance sheet of resident institutional sectors as defined in the SNA: households, the general government and corporations. As a result, external macroeconomic imbalances stemming from e.g. net borrowing AHDI is obtained by adding two broad components: 1) the flows that make up individuals’ primary (or market) income: labour income (compensation of employees and labour income of the self-employed – the latter being part of , as well as self-employment capital income – the latter being part of ); and 2) secondary or redistribution income: the cash and in-kind social transfers that households receive from governments (such as public education and healthcare services) net of the current taxes on income and wealth and the social security contributions paid by households. In this respect, consumption taxes are not considered among taxes paid by the household sector in the SNA. They appear in the difference between GDP at market prices and GDP at factor costs (i.e. GDP at market prices minus taxes on production and imports). AHDI can be expressed both in gross and net terms, with the difference being households’ consumption of fixed capital. . its current market price. The depreciation rate varies across countries and depends on the assumption about assets’ service lives ( There are well-known measurement issues in the estimation of households’ consumption of fixed capital, suggesting that gross adjusted disposable income may be more appropriate for cross-country comparison purposes. The correlation between them is close to one (0.99). ). This chapter performs a comparative analysis of household income but not of household wealth. As a result, the analysis should not be affected by differences in institutional arrangements governing countries’ pension systems, reflecting harmonising adjustments applied within the household income account. ), each employee contributes to a fund from which his or her future pension benefit will be paid. The national accounts record all contributions to the plan (both those of employers and of employees) as a form of savings by employees (i.e. an increase in the pension asset of employees) and pension benefits as (i.e. a decrease of the pension asset of retirees). To harmonise the measure of household income, the SNA framework records pension contributions and benefits of savings plans (i.e. pension funds) as if they were transfer plans (i.e. social security). Self – employment income corresponds to the SNA item , Panel B). The data refer to the components of gross adjusted household disposable income based on the System of National Accounts. The sum of compensation of employees, property income, operating surplus and mixed income (i.e. labour and capital income of the self-employed) represents primary or market income. Social contributions and transfers and social transfers in kind minus current taxes on income and wealth represent secondary income (income that the government redistributes to households directly or indirectly). See for a definition of the respective components shown in panels A and B. Components do not exactly sum to household gross adjusted disposable income due to statistical discrepancies. Data refer to 2014 for Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and Sweden; 2012 for New Zealand and Switzerland. For Chile and Korea, the component From a welfare perspective, household income growth is best measured in real consumption terms (i.e. changes in nominal household income should be deflated with consumption prices and not with output prices which are used to deflate GDP). This is what ultimately matters to assess household consumption possibilities as a function of production income. Tracking growth from the household income perspective thus starts with the simple comparison between growth in GDP and growth in real adjusted household income with a view to assessing the extent to which income generated from GDP trickles down to the average household. This comparison suggests that since the mid-1990s and in particular over the pre-crisis period, GDP has tended to grow more than households’ economic resources in many OECD countries ( , Panels A and B). The gap was particularly large in Korea and Ireland. In fact, only a few countries with large commodity-producing sectors experienced stronger gains in real household incomes relative to GDP (e.g. Norway and Australia). The growth gap between GDP and household incomes temporarily narrowed during the initial phase of the crisis, as automatic stabilisers (i.e. rises in net income transfers from government to households during recessions) and discretionary income-support measures introduced to moderate the fall in aggregate demand at the early stages of the recession had the effect – to a varying extent across countries – of protecting households’ disposable incomes from recession-induced losses in market incomes (i.e. income from work and capital) ( , Panel C). However, with the effect of automatic stabilisers and anti-crisis measures tapering off, the diverging trends resumed as GDP growth largely outpaced household income growth in 2009-13 ( , Panel D). Indeed, more than one third of OECD countries experienced contracting household real disposable incomes in post-crisis years, reflecting in part the impact of fiscal consolidation. Gross adjusted household disposable income and GDP are expressed in USD, constant prices and constant PPPs, OECD base year 2010. Gross adjusted household disposable income is deflated with the deflator for actual individual consumption while GDP per capita is deflated with the GDP deflator. For panel A, data refer to 1995-2014 for Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Sweden; 1995-2012 for Switzerland; 1999-2013 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain and the United Kingdom; 1999-2012 for New Zealand; for panel B, data refer to 1999-2007 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain, the United Kingdom and New Zealand; for panel C, data refer to 2008-09 for Chile; for panel D, data refer to 2009-14 for Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Sweden; 2009-12 for New Zealand and Switzerland. The comparison between real and nominal terms shows that a very large part of the growth gap between GDP and real household income is due to relative price effects over the period under consideration (i.e. 1995-2013). Most OECD countries experienced declines in output relative to consumer prices while the only ones experiencing increases in output prices relative to consumer prices are commodity-exporters such as Australia, Canada and Norway ( , Panel C) – pointing to terms-of-trade effects. In nominal terms, growth in household income was remarkably close to GDP growth. Many OECD countries have been raising their standard VAT rate, in particular between 2009 and 2014. The OECD average standard VAT rate reached 19.1% in January 2014, from 17.6% in January 2009. Ten OECD countries now have a standard rate above 22% versus four in 2009. See OECD (2014). For panel A, gross adjusted household disposable income per capita and GDP per capita are expressed in USD, constant prices and constant PPPs, OECD base year 2010. Gross adjusted household disposable income per capita is deflated with the deflator for actual individual consumption (consumer prices) while GDP per capita is deflated with the GDP deflator (output prices). For panel B, gross adjusted household disposable income per capita and GDP per capita are expressed in current prices. Data refer to 1995-2014 for Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Sweden; 1995-2012 for Switzerland; 1999-2013 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain and the United Kingdom; 1999-2012 for New Zealand. For example, household income includes -- while GDP excludes -- the wages and salaries of workers who are resident in a country but working in neighbouring countries; conversely, household income excludes, while GDP includes, the wages and salaries of workers who are non‑resident of a country where they have come to work. , Panels A and B), but to a much lesser extent than relative prices. Weaker GNI relative to GDP growth seems to have contributed to weaker growth of household income relative to GDP in e.g. Belgium and Korea ( , Panel C). At the opposite end of the spectrum, stronger GNI relative to GDP growth seems to have contributed to stronger growth of household income relative to GDP in e.g. Australia and Norway, which suggests that associated foreign income inflows were also driven by rising commodity prices over the period under consideration ( Gross national income (GNI), Gross domestic product (GDP) and gross adjusted household disposable income are expressed in USD, constant prices and constant PPPs, OECD base year 2010. For gross adjusted household disposable income, PPPs and deflators are those for actual individual consumption of households while for GDP and GNI, PPPs and deflators are those for GDP. Data refer to 1995-2014 for Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Sweden; 1995-2012 for Switzerland; 1999-2013 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain and the United Kingdom; 1999-2012 for New Zealand. In order to do so, the chapter introduces the household income share of GDP, a synthetic measure of the growth dividends from the household perspective, which is simply defined as the ratio of nominal AHDI to nominal GDP. A significant decline in the ratio would indicate that a substantial portion of the growth gap in real terms remains to be explained, even after taking into account relative price effects. As it turns out, such ratio has been stable over the last two decades, on average across OECD countries ( Nevertheless, this stability masks differential trends across countries, with marked declines – of around 6 percentage points – in Austria, Korea, Belgium and Norway and marked increases – of around 10 and 5 percentage points – in the Slovak Republic and Finland, respectively ( , Panel B). Gross domestic product (GDP) and household income are expressed in current prices. For 1995, data refer to 1999 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain, New Zealand and United Kingdom. For 2013, data refer to 2014 for Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Sweden; 2012 for New Zealand and Switzerland. , Panel A) tend to persist over time. They are likely due to factors such as the degree of countries’ openness, their trade structure and industrial composition. This section provides an exploratory analysis of the household income share along its components with a view to understanding the channels through which production income (GDP) translates into household income. This requires assessing the link between GDP and the three household income components defined in the first section: labour and capital (i.e. primary income); and secondary income, i.e. income redistributed from the government. This allows for shedding some light on income distribution between the household and non-household sectors of the national economy, in particular the government and corporate sectors. As a result, the functional income distribution, i.e. the division of income generated by domestic production between the remuneration of labour and that of capital, hence the aggregate labour share, is likely to influence in the short to medium term the division of income generated by domestic production between the household and non-household sectors. Arpaia et al. (2009); Azmat et al. (2012), Bentolila and Saint-Paul (2003), Checchi and Garcia-Penalosa, (2008, 2010), De Serres at al. (2002), Elsby et al. (2013), European Commission, (2007), Frydman and Saks, (2010), Harrison, (2002), Jaumotte and Tytell, (2007); more recent papers have analysed the concomitant rise in the capital share: see Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), Piketty (2013), Piketty and Zucman (2014), Rognlie (2015). income for the self-employed. There is wide consensus that the remuneration of proprietor’s labour should be assumed equal to the average compensation of wage earners (Arpaia et al., 2009). In order to gauge the robustness of the analysis, the aggregate labour share can be confronted to alternative comparable datasets, relying on recent work published by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). The correlations between the aggregate labour share estimates of this chapter and those of Karabarbounis and Neiman are very close to one: they range between 0.90 and 0.95 for the levels and between 0.78 and 0.85 for the annual changes between 1995 and 2010. An additional analytical issue is the treatment of those at the top of the pay distribution; those are often more akin to entrepreneurs, employed by shareholders and rewarded with stock options which are an entitlement based on future profits and reduce the future returns to other shareholders. OECD (2012) delivered adjusted labour shares, by excluding the top 1% earners’ income from the computation of the wage bill for seven countries over the period 1990 to mid-2000s: this shows that the drop in the share – or the labour share for the bottom 99% of income earners – is even greater than the drop in the share, especially for the United States and Canada, due to an increase in the wage share of top income earners. One recent study estimates that the labour share excluding the contribution of top incomes has declined so much in the US that it is lower today than at any other time since the 1930s (Giovannoni, 2014). This may reflect the surge in CEO and other top executives’ compensation, one of the main driving forces beyond the broader well-documented finding of an increase in the share of national income accruing to top incomes (Atkinson et al. 2011, Fernandes et al. 2009, Frydman and Jenker, 2010). This issue is beyond the scope of the current chapter but is left for future research, building on recent OECD work on top incomes (Ruiz and Woloszko, 2015). An alternative method, when focusing on the business sector and working at the industry level, is to impute the hourly compensation of a proprietor’s labour share by using the industry average compensation of employees. National accounts data suggest a relative stability in the labour share over the last two decades, on average across OECD countries for which the data are available ( ), somewhat in contrast with earlier studies. However, this average picture masks cross-country heterogeneity. Slightly half of the countries experienced a decline in the labour share: by more than 6 percentage points in Portugal, around 3 in the United States and 2 percentage points in Germany and Spain. Increases in the labour share experienced by the other half of the countries were of lower magnitude, generally between 1 and 2 percentage points, except in New Zealand and Sweden where such increases reached almost 5 percentage points. The difference between the findings of this chapter and of previous studies is likely to reflect differences in the vintage of the data and the nature of the approach. In particular, most studies have measured the labour share for a subset of industries as opposed to the aggregate economy, for instance by focusing on the non-primary business sector (as done in OECD, 2012) while others have also excluded the self-employed (as done in Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014). The current findings may mask compositional effects arising from cross-industry differences as well as workers’ reallocation between industries. As a result, the aggregate approach needs to be complemented with a finer industry-level approach in future work. The labour share is defined as the sum of employees’ wages and compensation and labour income of the self-employed, over GDP. Labour income of the self-employed is imputed by assuming that their annual wage is the same as for the average employee of the whole economy. GDP and wages and compensation are expressed in current prices. For 1995, data refer to 1998 for the United States; 1999 for Spain, the United Kingdom, Hungary, Ireland and New Zealand. For 2013, data refer to 2014 for Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden; 2012 for Switzerland, New Zealand and the United States. Trend rises in the aggregate capital share of GDP among high-income countries since the post war area have been documented and received growing attention among researchers and policymakers, not least reflecting associated inequality implications (Piketty, 2013). See Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), Piketty (2013), Piketty and Zucman (2014), Rognlie (2015). The most recent period is however characterized by a marked decline in the investment rate hence in capital per worker as discussed for instance in Chapter 3 of OECD (2015a). The impact on the functional income distribution is likely to depend on number of factors such as substitutability between capital and labour. The impact on the household capital income share is likely to materialize with a lag and will depend on companies’ profits and their redistribution strategies. : this item corresponds to the returns on households’ financial investments (interest, dividends, and imputed interests from life insurance policies). It represents a smaller part of household income per capita compared to other capital income components and may not deliver a comprehensive assessment of returns to financial capital, reflecting the following limitations: i) it excludes capital gains and losses, whether realised or unrealised, and ii) as a result, it excludes capital gains from share buy-backs, yet such corporate profits redistribution mechanism to shareholders has been on the rise relative to dividend pay-out and iii) in some countries such as Germany and Italy it includes self-employment income accruing to a very substantial group of small individual firms. Proper measurement of the capital income share ideally requires taking into account capital depreciation. The increasing share of fast-depreciating capital, notably intangible and knowledge-based capital (KBC) in all OECD countries implies an increase in the average depreciation rate of the overall capital stock (Andrews and Criuscolo, 2013). Experts generally assume a depreciation rate around 15% for intangible capital, which is much higher than the depreciation rate applied to tangible capital, although this is a new area of research which implies that any such estimate is surrounded by uncertainty. Even without formally taking into account KBC, recent empirical findings based on a sample of G7 countries suggest that trend rise in the capital income share is less pronounced when measured in net terms, reflecting increasing depreciation rates (Rognlie, 2015). According to SNA data, the household capital income share of GDP (i.e. the ratio of capital income accruing to the household sector over GDP) has declined in the vast majority of OECD countries since the mid-90s ( Portugal and the United States are among the few countries experiencing a rise in the household capital income share and they are also among the countries experiencing a marked decline in the labour share. This could suggest a shift in the functional income distribution. Nevertheless, a number of countries experienced a decline in the household capital income share amid stability (e.g. United Kingdom) or decline (e.g. Austria) in the labour share. The household capital income share is defined as the sum of household operating surplus, capital income of the self-employed and property income, over GDP. Capital income of the self-employed is imputed by the difference between their mixed income and their labour income, assuming that their annual wage is the same as for the average employee of the whole economy. GDP and household capital income are expressed in current prices. Net capital income is obtained by subtracting households’ consumption of fixed capital from gross capital income. For 1995, data refer to 1998 for the United States; 1999 for Spain, the United Kingdom, Hungary, Ireland and New Zealand. For 2013, data refer to 2014 for Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden; 2012 for Switzerland, New Zealand and the United States. Income from housing services has been the only component of household capital income not falling relative to GDP. This corresponds to rental income, most of which is imputed in the national accounts on the grounds of owner-occupied housing. This finding echoes recent work by Rognlie (2015) as well as Bonnet et al. (2014) who show that the trend rise in the capital share of GDP has been driven by the housing sector. The finding of positive effects from housing assets is also emphasized in recent OECD work on household wealth: OECD (2015b) shows that rising house prices have been a key factor leading to higher household wealth in some OECD countries such as Australia, Belgium, Canada, Spain and the UK. In the SNA, the household income account does not allow for directly capturing capital gains associated with rising house prices – unless indirectly reflected in rising actual and imputed rents. This could mitigate the adverse distributional consequences of rising capital incomes, because housing is more equitably distribut ed than other capital assets (i.e. financial assets), as recently shown in OECD (2015b). Nevertheless, the findings reported in this chapter provide a more complex picture: widespread declines in the household capital income share have coincided with mixed developments in the labour share (i.e. increases in some countries, declines in others). The decline in household capital income could nevertheless be overestimated in the current analysis if the nature of capital income has been changing towards forms of remuneration that are not covered by the SNA. This notably applies to realised capital gains, as discussed before, including share buy-backs, which have been increasingly used by corporations as a way to redistribute profits to shareholders. Assessing developments in household capital income in association with developments in corporate profit distribution and savings behaviour is also an important area for future research. , Panel A). This finding should be qualified: it largely reflects higher social transfers and lower taxes during the crisis period ( The household secondary income share is defined as the sum of the net social benefits, transfers, and social transfers in-kind received by households, minus current taxes on income, wealth, etc. over GDP. The household secondary income share is defined as the ratio of household secondary income over GDP. GDP and household secondary income are expressed in current prices. For 1995, data refer to 1998 for the United States; 1999 for Spain, the United Kingdom, Hungary, Ireland and New Zealand. For 2013, data refer to 2014 for Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden; 2012 for Switzerland, New Zealand and the United States. Over the period 1995-2013, declines in the household income share of GDP were in most cases largely driven by declines in the household capital income share of GDP while increases were driven by increases in the household secondary income share of GDP. The contribution of labour income was heterogeneous across countries, but generally of lower magnitude ( , Panels B and C). Indeed, most OECD countries experienced declines in the household income share of GDP over the pre-crisis period; this was driven by declines in primary incomes, in particular by declines in the household capital income share but also, though to a lesser extent, by declines in the labour share. Such declines were not generally compensated by increases in household secondary income shares of GDP, in contrast with the crisis period. for the definition of respectively the labour share, the household capital income share (gross terms), and the household secondary income share. GDP and the various components are expressed in current prices. For 2013, data refer to 2014 for Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and Sweden; 2012 for New Zealand and Switzerland. For Chile and Korea, the component includes mixed income. For panel C, 1999 instead of 1995 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain, the United Kingdom and New Zealand and 1998 for the United States. ). The association is even weaker for household capital income. Developments in the household capital income share reveal nothing on market-income inequality, as most OECD countries have experienced declines in household capital income shares and increases in Developments in the labour share and in market income inequality¹ (i.e. each share of the population gets the same share of income), and 1, in the case of (i.e. all income goes to the individual with the highest income). For 1995, data refer to 1998 for the United States, 1999 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. For 2012, data refer to 2011 for Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Switzerland and Sweden. for the Gini index. For 1995, data refer to 1998 for the United States, 1999 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. For 2012, data refer to 2011 for Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Switzerland and Sweden. Secondary or redistribution income allows for moving from market income to disposable income, i.e. market income net of current income taxes paid and transfers received by households from the government. The association between developments in the household secondary income share of GDP and in inequality of household disposable income is negative and relatively strong ( , Panel A). Redistribution income is indeed meant to reduce the impact of market income inequality on disposable income inequality. Nevertheless, the redistributive effect of taxes and transfers is heterogeneous across OECD countries: for a given rise in secondary income accruing to the average household, countries are more (e.g. Portugal) or less (the Netherlands) successful at moderating the transmission from market income inequality to disposable income inequality ( for the Gini index. The extent of redistribution is defined as the difference between the Gini coefficients for disposable and market income, relative to the value of the Gini coefficient for market income. It is measured in terms of the change over the period 1995- 2012. For 1995, data refer to 1998 for the United States, 1999 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. For 2012, data refer to 2011 for Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Switzerland and Sweden. Wrapping-up on the different components of household income, i.e. labour, capital and secondary income, changes in the overall household income share of GDP are positively but weakly correlated with changes in disposable income inequality ( for a definition of the Gini index. For 1995, data refer to 1998 for the United States, 1999 for Hungary, Ireland, Spain, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. For 2012, data refer to 2011 for Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Switzerland and Sweden. Arpaia et al. (2009); Azmat et al. (2012), Bentolila and Saint-Paul (2003), Checchi and Garcia-Penalosa, (2008, 2010), De Serres at al. (2002), Elsby et al. (2013), European Commission, (2007), Frydman and Saks, (2010), Harrison, (2002), Jaumotte and Tytell, (2007); more recent papers have analysed the concomitant rise in the capital share: see Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), Piketty (2013), Piketty and Zucman (2014), Rognlie (2015). This reflects differences in substitutability between capital and low skilled as opposed to high skilled labour, because different degree of substitutability between capital and labour have different implications on the effect on the labour share of a change in the relative price of labour. When the elasticity of substitution between capital and labour is smaller than 1, the labour share will increase if the capital-labour ratio increases. In this context, the price effect will dominate the quantity effect. This implies that a reduction in workers’ bargaining power leading to a decline in the real wage will reduce the labour share if the elasticity of substitution between labour and capital is smaller than 1. Given that it is generally assumed that high skilled labour is complementary to capital while low skilled labour is substitutable to capital, capital deepening can increase the labour share of high skilled workers and reduce the labour share of low skilled workers. Robust findings for advanced countries can be summarised as follows (OECD, 2012, Bassanini and Manfredi, 2012): Competition from foreign firms in domestic market induces structural changes that have different effects on the aggregate labour share, that is: i) greater import penetration prompts reallocation of resources away from affected industries and towards either domestic industries or countries with lower labour costs; and ii) growth of import penetration appears more important in industries that are typically characterised by a high labour share. The resulting larger trade-induced reallocation away from these industries contributes to reduce the aggregate labour share, although available evidence points to a small effect. Evidence on product market liberalisation pertains to the network industries, as most reforms have been taking place in these industries during the 1990s. Reductions in barriers to entry have no significant effect on the labour share. This is likely to reflect the interplay between counter-balancing effects of pro-competitive reforms: i) on the one hand, these reforms may erode firms’ rents and squeeze profits hence increase the labour share; ii) on the other hand, these reforms may erode the bargaining power of the average worker hence reduce the labour share. This likely reflects the important and confounding role of globalisation, increased competition and financial liberalisation, which have: i) reduced the collective bargaining power of workers across the board, that is, irrespective of wage bargaining regimes, and ii) at the same time, catalysed wage bargaining reforms towards either more decentralisation or more centralisation and co-ordination, See Box 3.5 in OECD (2012) for a summary of empirical studies on globalisation and increased competition on workers’ bargaining power. Increases in the statutory minimum wage relative to the median tend to reduce the labour share, but the quantitative effect is estimated to be very small (OECD, 2012). This could reflect that firms are induced to invest in labour-saving innovation prompted by the need to contain the rise in labour costs. This finding would suggest that large increases in minimum wage could reduce the labour share, even though such increases might reduce wage inequality in the lower-half of the wage distribution and in-work poverty. Indeed, empirical evidence based on European countries suggests that higher minimum wages increase low-skilled labour shares and reduce medium-skilled labour shares, resulting in a small negative effect at the aggregate level (European Commission, 2007). Stepping-up job search support and active labour market policies (ALMPs) while reducing the generosity of unemployment benefits has been found to increase the labour share of low-skilled workers across European countries (European Commission, 2007). Well-designed and targeted activation and training policies primarily induce an increase in employment of low-skilled workers, who are overrepresented among the pool of unemployed. The evidence suggests that this compensates any potential moderating effect on wages. The overall effect of higher spending on ALMP on the aggregate labour share has been found insignificant, reflecting a negative effect on the labour share of medium-skilled workers by contrast to the effect on low-skilled workers; while that of higher UB replacement rates has been found negative, reflecting a concomitant negative effect on the labour share of low and medium-skilled workers. Relaxing job protection has not been found to trigger any significant change in the aggregate labour share, even though it has been found to boost aggregate productivity growth. This neutrality may reflect the interplay of differential effects of job protection between industries and workers. Empirical evidence based on European countries suggests that stricter job protection increases high-skilled labour shares and reduces medium-skilled labour shares, resulting in a small negative effect at the aggregate level (European Commission, 2007). Non-standard employment has become the predominant source of job creation in many OECD countries since the mid-nineties (OECD, 2015, Chapter 4). More recent forms of non-standard employment such as on-call work, subcontracted work and zero-hours contracts in e.g. the United Kingdom and the United States certainly favour hiring flexibility for firms and in principle also for workers who need it. However, in practice, for workers, they have been associated with more wage variability and reduced firms’ obligations to ensure standard benefits and protection; as well as with low career and training opportunities. Policy changes of this type may reduce workers’ bargaining power and as a result, their wages, especially for those with low skills. The deregulation of financial markets may have lowered workers’ bargaining power by pressuring firms to reduce costs; hence to focus on core activities while sub-contracting labour-intensive activities in order to reduce debt while at the same time generate high short-term profits. Missing countries do not have a national statutory minimum wage except for Mexico. Data refer to 2004-05 and 2009-10 for India; 2013 for Colombia. Exactly half of all workers have wages either below or above the median wage for the OECD countries. Percentage of minimum to average wage for China, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and India. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios); International Labour Organisation Vol 152, No.3-4; Panel B: OECD, Simple average of the net replacement rates for the following households situations: single with no child and with two children at 67% and 100% AW, one-earner married couple with no child and with two children at 67% AW and 100% AW. After tax and including unemployment and family benefits. Social assistance and other means-tested benefits are assumed to be available subject to relevant income conditions. Housing costs are assumed equal to 20% of AW. The OECD average excludes Chile for 2008 and Mexico for 2008 and 2013. For Turkey, the average worker earnings (AW) value is not available. Calculations are based on average production worker earnings (APW). Initial phase of unemployment but following any waiting period. Any income taxes payable on unemployment benefits are determined in relation to annualised benefit values (i.e. monthly values multiplied by 12) even if the maximum benefit duration is shorter than 12 months. After tax and including unemployment benefits, social assistance, family and housing benefits in the 60th month of benefit receipt. Values for Italy and Turkey are equal to zero in 2008 and 2013. No. 14; for Latvia, data are based on the methodology described in No. 14; for Latvia, data are based on the methodology described in The change in pension wealth is a measure of the incentive to remain in the workforce for an additional period. It measures the increase in the level of pension entitlement one gains by remaining in employment for an additional year. The calculation is the annual average increase in males’ pension wealth when working from age 55 to 59 (early retirement) and from age 60 to 64 (old-age pension). Net pension wealth is the present value of the flow of pension benefits, taking account of the taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is measured and expressed as a multiple of gross annual individual earnings in the respective country. See OECD (2013), Pensions at a Glance 2013: OECD and G20 Indicators for additional details. between single and dual-earner couple families, for a given overall level of earnings – e.g. looking at couple families with incomes of 133% of average earnings. It shows the difference in net transfers to government between two household cases: (1) – with one earner with 133% of average earnings and (2) - both spouses earn the same either average earnings or 67% of average earnings. The difference is in percentage points and computed as [(1)-(2)]/(1). The value for 2008 is not reported as it is highly distorted due to the fact that the net transfers to government from single-earner couples is close to zero. Childcare expenditure covers children under three enrolled in childcare and children between the ages of three and five enrolled in pre-school. Childcare refers to formal day-care services, such as day-care centres and family day-care. Pre-school includes kindergartens and day-care centres which usually provide an educational content as well as traditional care for children (ISCED 0 under UNESCO’s classification system). Local government spending may not be properly captured in the data for federal countries. Couples where the first earner earns 100% of the average wage and the second earns 67% of the average wage. Lone parent earning 67% of the average wage. For Canada, the European Union, Finland, Norway, OECD, Slovak Republic, Slovenia and the United Kingdom, childcare benefits refer to childcare and other benefits. Taxing Wages 2015 The OECD average excludes Australia, Chile, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico and New Zealand. Data refer to 2012 for France, Korea, New Zealand, Poland and Spain; 2011 for Israel and the United Kingdom. OECD and EU averages exclude Greece, Iceland and Turkey. Data refer to 2014 for Colombia, Slovenia and the United Kingdom; 2012 for BRIICS countries and Latvia. Values for 2013 are equal to zero for Chile, Indonesia and New Zealand. The coverage rate is measured as the percentage of workers who are covered by collective bargaining agreements, regardless of whether or not they belong to a trade union. For 2013, data refer to 2012 for Australia, Estonia, France, Israel, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Poland, Indonesia and South Africa; 2011 for New Zealand; 2010 for Italy; 2009 for Ireland. For 2008, data refer to 2009 for Chile, Denmark, Estonia, Hungary, Ireland, Mexico, Norway, Switzerland, Brazil, the Russian Federation and Latvia; 2007 for New Zealand, Poland and Sweden; 2005 for Italy; 2000 for Israel. The union density rate is the percentage of workers belonging to a trade union. The rates refer to wage and salary workers. The last available year is 2014 for Australia, Canada, Chile, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States; 2012 for Indonesia, Israel, Korea, Latvia, Luxembourg, Poland, Portugal and South Africa; 2011 for Brazil. October 2015. The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries The 2013 Update of the OECD Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries Data refer to 2013 for Brazil, Chile and France; 2012 for South Africa; 2011 for Indonesia; 2010 for China. Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators Graduation rates represent the estimated percentage of people from a given age cohort that is expected to graduate at some point during their lifetime. This estimate is based on the number of graduates in a given year, regardless of their age, divided by the size of the average cohort of the typical age of graduation. In panel A, OECD and EU averages exclude Australia, Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and exclude for 2005 only Austria, Hungary, Israel, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey. In panel B, OECD and EU averages exclude Belgium, Canada, Estonia, France, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Korea, Mexico and Poland. First-time graduation rates for ISCED 3. The last available year is 2014 for China and India; data refer to 2007-08 instead of 2005 for India. For Brazil and the Russian Federation, data refer to graduation rate at upper secondary level for typical age from the general programmes except for India for which upper secondary education is defined as persons aged 19 year olds who completed upper secondary education. First-time graduation rates for ISCED 5 to 7. Data refer to 2014 for China and India and to 2007-08 instead of 2005 for India. For India, tertiary education refers to the 24 year olds and over who have graduated. Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators PISA is the Programme for International Student Assessment. Data for India is the average for 2010 of the states of Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh and therefore may not be representative of nation-wide outcomes. PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science PISA is the Programme for International Student Assessment. OECD = 100. Average of PISA scores in mathematics and science only in 2009 for France. The variance components in mathematics, sciences and reading were estimated for all students in participating countries with data on socio-economic background and study programmes. The variance in student performance is calculated as the square of the standard deviation of PISA scores in reading, mathematics and science for the sample of students used in the analysis. PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do (Volume I, Revised edition, February 2014): Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science, PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed, Education at a Glance 2011: OECD Indicators; PISA 2012 Results: Excellence through Equity (Volume II): Giving Every Student the Chance to Succeed, The last available year is 2013 for Australia, Brazil, Colombia, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands and Poland. Data refer to 2014 for Canada, China, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia and Switzerland; 2012 for Australia, Ireland, Luxembourg. EU refers to all 28 members of the European Union. Average 2009-13 for Chile, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, the Russian Federation and Colombia. Average 2006-09 for Turkey. Average of years 2011 and 2013 for Iceland, New Zealand and Sweden; average of years 2011 and 2012 for France, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Portugal and South Africa; 2012 for Switzerland; 2011 for Australia, Austria, Belgium and Mexico; 2009 for Luxembourg. Average of years 2006 and 2007 for Austria; average of years 2007 and 2008 for Chile and Denmark; 2007 for Greece, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Sweden; 2008 for Switzerland. The last available year is 2012 for Belgium, Brazil, Ireland, Spain, Switzerland, the United States and South Africa; 2011 for Australia, Iceland, Mexico and the Russian Federation. Instead of 2006, data refer to 2007 for Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Korea, Mexico, Slovenia and Sweden; 2008 for Chile, New Zealand, Switzerland and Turkey; 2009 for China. , December 2015. 